Public Disclosure Authorized

Public Disclosure Authorized

Public Disclosure Authorized

Public Disclosure Authorized

GLACIERS, RIVERS,
AND SPRINGS
A Water Sector Diagnostic of Nepal

George Joseph and Anne Shrestha

ABOUT THE WATER GLOBAL PRACTICE
Launched in 2014, the World Bank Group’s Water Global Practice brings together financing,
knowledge, and implementation in one platform. By combining the Bank’s global knowledge with
country investments, this model generates more firepower for transformational solutions to help
countries grow sustainably.
Please visit us at www.worldbank.org/water or follow us on Twitter at @WorldBankWater.

ABOUT GWSP
This publication received the support of the Global Water Security & Sanitation Partnership (GWSP).
GWSP is a multidonor trust fund administered by the World Bank’s Water Global Practice and
­supported by Australia’s Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade, Austria’s Federal Ministry of
Finance, the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation, Denmark’s Ministry of Foreign Affairs, the Netherlands’
Ministry of Foreign Affairs, the Swedish International Development Cooperation Agency, Switzerland’s
State Secretariat for Economic Affairs, the Swiss Agency for Development and Cooperation, and the
U.S. Agency for International Development.
Please visit us at www.worldbank.org/gwsp or follow us on Twitter @TheGwsp.

GLACIERS, RIVERS,
AND SPRINGS
A Water Sector Diagnostic of Nepal
George Joseph and Anne Shrestha

© 2022 International Bank for Reconstruction and Development / The World Bank
1818 H Street NW, Washington, DC 20433
Telephone: 202-473-1000; Internet: www.worldbank.org
This work is a product of the staff of The World Bank with external contributions. The findings,
­interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this work do not necessarily reflect the views of
The World Bank, its Board of Executive Directors, or the governments they represent.
The World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this work. All maps were
cleared by the Cartography Unit of the World Bank Group. The boundaries, colors, denominations, and
other information shown on any map in this work do not imply any judgment on the part of The World
Bank concerning the legal status of any territory or the endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.

Rights and Permissions
The material in this work is subject to copyright. Because The World Bank encourages dissemination of
its knowledge, this work may be reproduced, in whole or in part, for noncommercial purposes as long
as full attribution to this work is given.
Please cite the work as follows: Joseph, George, and Anne Shrestha. 2022. “Glaciers, Rivers, and Springs:
A Water Sector Diagnostic of Nepal.” World Bank, Washington, DC.
Any queries on rights and licenses, including subsidiary rights, should be addressed to World Bank
Publications, The World Bank Group, 1818 H Street NW, Washington, DC 20433, USA; fax: 202-522-2625;
e-mail: pubrights@worldbank.org
Cover design: Chris Phillips, Circle Graphics, Inc.
Cover photo: MattW from Flickr.

Interior photos:
page iii: Jean-Marie Hullot/Flickr
page vii: UK Department for International Development/Flickr
page ix: David Hamill/Flickr
page xv: Hendrik Terbeck/Flickr
pages viii, 4, 8, 42, 50, 54, 56: Anne Shrestha/World Bank
page 1: IRRI
page 5: Phil Parsons/Flickr
page 9: Shree Krishna Dhital/Wikimedia Commons
page 34: Gerd Eichmann/Wikimedia Commons
page 35: Peretz Partensky/Flickr
page 43: Marcello Gorreri/Flickr
page 45: Haushala Thapa
page 48: UGA CAES/Extension/Flickr
page 49: Kiril Rusev/Flickr
page 51: Rex Turgano/Flickr

Contents
Acknowledgments  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . vii
Executive Summary .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . ix
Abbreviations  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . xv

1

Introduction .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .

2

Where Are We? Water and Nepal’s Development .  .  .  .  .  .  .

1

Notes  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 3

5

Legacy of a High-Remittance, Low-Growth Trap  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 5
Investments in Hydropower .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 6
Water Supply and Sanitation Services Insufficient for Human
or Economic Needs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
Poverty Reduction and GDP Growth Hinge on Agricultural
Productivity Growth  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 7
Notes  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 7
iii

iv   GLACIERS, RIVERS, AND SPRINGS: A WATER SECTOR DIAGNOSTIC OF NEPAL

3

What Are the Challenges? .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .

9

Challenge 1: Service Delivery in Water Supply and Sanitation  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 9
Challenge 2: Water Governance for Service Delivery
and Integrated Management in a Federal Framework .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 17
Challenge 3: Irrigation for Greater Agricultural Productivity and
Food Security  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 22
Challenge 4: Building Resilience—Dealing with Climate
Variability and Change  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 25
Challenge 5: Transboundary Management .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 31
Notes  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 33

4

Where Do We Go? .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 35
Strengthen State Capacity and Institutions  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 35
Maintain Reliable Water Supply and Sanitation Services for
Basic and Economic Needs  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 36
Smooth Out the Effects of Climate Variability for Water Security
and Resilience  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 37
Boost Agricultural Productivity to Promote Growth and
Poverty Reduction  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 38
Develop Strong Regulatory Institutions to Enable Effective
Private Sector Investments  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 38
Build Knowledge on Transboundary Collaboration for Resolving
Issues in Irrigation, Energy, and Flooding .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 39
Notes  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 41

Appendix A: Water-Related Institutions .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 43
Appendix B: Development Partner Engagement  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 45

Contents    v

Appendix C: Electricity Sources and Loss .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 49
Appendix D: Methods for Climate and
Disaster Risk Analysis .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 51
References  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 55
Boxes
BOX 3.1 State of Water Service Delivery and Cost of Shortages in Kathmandu................. 11
BOX 3.2 Institutional Challenges of a Newly Formed Municipality under
the Federal System..................................................................................................... 18
BOX 3.3 Governance Lessons from the National Electricity Crisis Resolution
Action Plan 2008........................................................................................................ 19

Figures
FIGURE 3.1 NRW and Supply Hours, Nepali Cities, 2014–15 .......................................... 13
FIGURE 3.2 Underutilization of Budget Allocations, 2015–18.......................................... 20
FIGURE C.1 Generation, Import, and System Loss of Hydropower, Nepal, 2017–19............ 49

Maps
MAP 3.1 Greatest Absolute Increases in Built-Up Areas, Kathmandu and
Surrounding Districts, 2000–14.................................................................................... 10
MAP B3.1.1 Household Water Security Index, MWSP, Current and after First Phase ......... 12
MAP 3.2 Districts Vulnerable to High Levels of Food Poverty, Stunting, and
Diarrhea with Unimproved Drinking Water or Poor Sanitation Access ............................. 15
MAP B.3.3.1 Hydropower Plants under Operation, Construction, or Survey, as of 2014....... 19
MAP 3.3 Annual and Spatial Distribution of Mean Precipitation, by Season, 1981–2000 .... 26

vi   GLACIERS, RIVERS, AND SPRINGS: A WATER SECTOR DIAGNOSTIC OF NEPAL

MAP 3.4 Significant Trends in Seasonal Precipitation Totals for (a) Pre
Monsoon; (b) Monsoon; (c) Post Monsoon; and (d) Winter Season by
Field Trend (significance at 0.1).................................................................................... 27
MAP 3.5 Population Exposure to Landslides ................................................................. 29
MAP 3.6 Projected Change in Consecutive Dry Days, 2016–45
versus 1981–2010 Baseline........................................................................................ 30

Tables
TABLE 3.1 Gap between Storage Capacity and Storage Needs, by Country, 2006................ 31
TABLE 3.2 Summary of Treaties, India and Nepal, 1920–96............................................. 32
TABLE 4.1 Policy Areas, Interventions, and Potential Performance Indicators..................... 40
TABLE A.1 Government Ministries and Departments Responsible for
Water-Related Issues............................................................................................... 43
TABLE B.1 Preliminary Mapping of Development Partner
Engagement in the Water Sector............................................................................... 45
TABLE D.1 CMIP5 Models Included in the NEX-GDDP Dataset ..................................... 52
TABLE D.2 Selected GCM Runs .................................................................................. 53

Acknowledgments
This work was made possible with contribution by the Global Water Security and Sanitation Partnership
(GWSP). This report was prepared under the guidance of Takuya Kamata, Practice Manager, World
Bank Water, South Asia, as a knowledge product of the Nepal Water Platform.
We thank the Nepal Water Platform team members—Alex McPhail, Feriha Mugisha, Joep Verhagen,
Lalima Maskey, Lixin Gu, Lilian Pena Pereira Weiss, Qiao Wang, Qiong Lu, Rubika Shrestha, Shyam KC,
Suman Prasad Sharma, Xingchi Wang, Yi Rong Hoo— for substantial contributions and comments on
several drafts. The International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis (IIASA) and Francis Gassert
provided key analytic inputs on water balance and climate risk assessment, respectively.
We are also grateful for comments from colleagues beyond the team, including Andrea Kutter (Senior
Natural Resources Management Specialist), Andrew D. Goodland (Program Lead), Bipul Singh (Senior
Energy Specialist), Demetrios Papathanasiou (Practice Manager, Energy), Greg Browder (Lead Water
Resources Management Specialist), and Pratibha Mistry (Senior Water Supply and Sanitation Specialist).
We also thank our peer reviewers; Jonas Parby (Sr. Urban Specialist), Purna Chhetri (Sr. Agricultural
Specialist), and Jason Russ (Water Economist) for their valuable comments, and Faris H. Hadad-​
Zervos (Country Director) for chairing the review meeting.
This document also benefited from consultations with several government officials and development
partners. We are thankful for insightful comments on a draft from the Asian Development Bank (ADB),
Ministry of Energy, Water Resources and Irrigation (MoEWRI), Ministry of Forests and Environment
(MoFE), Ministry of Water Supply (MoWS), Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock Development,
Embassy of Finland, Japan International Cooperation Agency (JICA), United Nations Children’s Fund
(UNICEF), and WaterAid.
vii

Executive Summary
Nepal is rich in water resources with a dense network of glaciers, lakes, rivers, and springs that originate
in the Himalayas. However, only an estimated 15 billion cubic meters (BCM) of the 225 BCM water available annually is utilized for economic and social purposes.1 Several elements have contributed to this
low rate of utilization, including Nepal’s rugged geography, inadequate institutional capacity, a history
of prolonged political instability, and highly skewed seasonality—more than 80 percent of the precipitation in a year falls within a span of four months. As a nascent federal state, Nepal has the potential to
redraw its development trajectory, conditional on maintaining a stable political climate. Water lies at
the heart of Nepal’s main economic sectors, namely, agriculture and energy, and therefore is central to
food and energy security. For sustained economic growth and poverty reduction, and to enhance shared
prosperity, Nepal must increase its investments in water-related infrastructure and institutions and
improve the effectiveness of these investments. These efforts are doubly important, and challenging,
given Nepal’s rapid urbanization and the growing climate crisis.
The national narrative on water resources development has prominently featured hydropower, but it
is important for Nepal to plan for broader water security for its people and implement an integrated
approach to water management. A public expenditure review showed that almost 38 percent of Nepal’s
water-related public expenditure in 2017 and 2018 was on hydropower. Although there is much to be
done to harness this vital resource, it is important to broaden the development focus and integrate
hydropower in a larger water resource management strategy. This strategy would ensure that water is
available for basic and economic needs—even through the dry season—as a core component of Nepal’s
overall development plan.

ix

x   GLACIERS, RIVERS, AND SPRINGS: A WATER SECTOR DIAGNOSTIC OF NEPAL

Given Nepal’s development context and challenges, this document aims to analyze the most pressing
sector challenges and identify strategic sector priorities that are aligned with the country’s partnership
framework. It offers a snapshot of water in Nepal’s development story and situates the water sector in
the broader context of the national economy, highlighting the importance of managing water resources
for sustained economic growth and poverty reduction. It then presents five pressing sector-related
challenges and concludes with a set of priority areas.

Water and Nepal’s Development Trajectory
With a stable, high gross domestic product (GDP) growth rate of more than 6 percent from 2017 to
2020, Nepal had shown promising signs of being on the path to escaping its high-remittance, lowgrowth trap. Despite growth in the service sector, exports, and tourism, Nepal still relies heavily on
remittances, which have grown to about 30 percent of its GDP. Growth has been primarily consumption driven. Conditional on a more stable political climate, Nepal has the potential to increase domestic productive capacity, which can be catalyzed by investments in water sector development. However,
as the COVID-19 pandemic unfolds, both remittances and tourism have been severely hampered, with
dire economic consequences.
To meet Nepal’s goal of reaching a middle-income status by 2030, the country needs to boost investments significantly by about 10 to 15 percent of its GDP annually through 2030 (Ezemenari and Joshi
2019). The country aims for rapid hydropower development as a part of that goal. However, the failures
of the decade from 2008 to 2018 in the hydropower sector—as severe governance issues hampered the
selection and execution of large civil works—highlight the importance of ongoing institutional reforms
that could create the necessary enabling environment. Meanwhile, various crucial water-related investments outside of the hydropower sector are in need of as much attention and investments.
To improve competitiveness and create domestic jobs, Nepal needs to expand safe and reliable
water supply for domestic, agricultural, and industrial use. Sanitation and wastewater services also
need significant investments. The status quo is not conducive to growth and human capital development; the main hubs for nonfarm economic production like Kathmandu, Birgunj, and Biratnagar have
extremely poor water, sewerage, and wastewater management. Most of Kathmandu receives about
four hours of piped water supply per week, which obliges households and firms to bear significant
costs for storage and alternative sources. The situation is comparable for other rapidly urbanizing
cities. Agriculture continues to remain a gamble. Because of low adaptation to climate variability, it
is common to find macroeconomic outlooks citing weather as the prime predictor of sectoral output:
for example “assuming normal monsoons, agricultural growth is expected to average 4.4 percent”
(Ezemenari and Joshi 2019, 2). Nevertheless, agriculture remains the major source of employment
in the country, with most of the poor relying on it for their livelihoods. These realities signal the
need to prioritize water management more holistically and broaden investments for human and
economic needs.

Executive Summary    xi

What Are the Major Challenges?
The following five challenges capture some of the main hurdles in water-related service delivery and
in harnessing water resources for Nepal’s sustainable development.

Challenge 1: Service Delivery in Water Supply and Sanitation
Despite considerable progress over the decade, the relatively high access rates of technologically
improved water supply and sanitation (WSS) do not meaningfully convey the status of their services in the country. One of the most salient problems in water service provision is the low degree
of functionality of existing infrastructure, which has affected the adequate and reliable delivery of
safe drinking water. A nationwide functionality study found that, of a sample of 41,205 piped water
supply schemes, only 25.4 percent were described as well functioning and 31.8 percent did not have
year-round supply (GoN 2014b).
Rapid urbanization is likely to worsen the pressures on water infrastructure. Kathmandu, the fastest-growing urban area and the biggest economic hub, meets less than 32 percent of demand in the
wet season and less than 19 percent in the dry season (Udmale et al. 2016). Poor access to safe water
and sanitation poses a major threat to health, especially during a pandemic like COVID-19. The
condition is particularly worrisome for those many city residents who live in slums, where access
levels are very low. This problem is not unique to Kathmandu. Although secondary towns fare better
in terms of per capita water consumption and supply hours per day, their coverage rates are lower.
The average nonrevenue water for the 26 cities assessed is about 40 percent, and none has a 24-hour
water supply (GoN 2016a). Moreover, safe fecal sludge management and wastewater treatment is not
commonly practiced in the country.
Poor water quality is a persistent problem. A nationally representative survey from 2019 estimated
that the percentage of households with safe drinking water without Escherichia coli contamination
was as low as 19.1 percent, a slight improvement from 14.5 percent in 2014.2 In 2014, only 50 percent
of the 26 urban utilities had a water quality monitoring system in place, and although all of them
had chlorination units, their application and maintenance were irregular (GoN 2016a). The human
capital costs of poor water supply, sanitation, and hygiene (WASH) are high, which is manifested in
poor maternal and child health, with lasting consequences for the productivity and earnings of the
next generation.

Challenge 2: Water Governance for Service Delivery and Integrated
Management in a Federal Framework
In the new federal system, the Local Governance Operation Act 2017 places the responsibility
for providing safe water, sanitation, irrigation, and disaster mitigation services with local governing bodies. Although the proximity of local authorities to citizens signals the potential for better
­accountability, the institutional vacuum left by the absence of local elections for over two decades
(until 2017) suggests the need for building strong frameworks for accountability in the first place.
Effective local governance would need significant support to build administrative capacity for

xii   GLACIERS, RIVERS, AND SPRINGS: A WATER SECTOR DIAGNOSTIC OF NEPAL

service delivery and water resource management. The existing capacity at the federal level also needs
strengthening, as evidenced by poor planning, chronic underspending, and the massive time and cost
overruns of infrastructure projects.
The role that local governments will play in facilitating integrated water resource management or
basin-scale planning is yet to be specified, but the requirement for greater coordination and conflict
resolution is likely to be one of the biggest challenge. Coordination across subsectors like irrigation,
water supply, and hydropower also calls for significant effort.

Challenge 3: Irrigation for Greater Agricultural Productivity and Food Security
Because agriculture constitutes one-third of Nepal’s GDP and the largest portions of its formal and
informal jobs, improving agricultural productivity remains a priority for both sustained growth and
poverty alleviation. Despite its vast water resources, Nepal’s rugged t­ errain allows cultivation of only
about 24 percent of its total land area, of which 64 percent is ­considered suitable for irrigation. About
47 percent (1.1 million hectares) of the total cultivable farmlands are irrigated, of which less than half
have year-round irrigation (GoN and ADB 2019; Pradhan and Belbase 2018).
Agricultural productivity in Nepal since the 2000s has remained nearly stagnant (Cosic, Dahal, and
Kitzmuller 2017). The slow growth has been further threatened by extreme weather events and
restricted by weak irrigation infrastructure, among other drawbacks. The dearth of year-round irrigation indicates the sector’s low adaptive capacity to respond to normal climatic variations. Changing
precipitation patterns induced by climate change, such as a delayed onset of the monsoon season, are
becoming more frequent and have affected not only agricultural output but also child development
indicators (Bharati et al. 2014; Tiwari, Jacoby, and Skoufias 2013). However, evidence from smaller-scale
groundwater irrigation interventions in Terai indicates considerable scope for productivity growth and
return on investment (ADB 2012).

Challenge 4: Building Resilience—Dealing with Climate Variability and Change
Human development and growth in all sectors hinge on climate adaptation to ensure that there is
enough water through the dry seasons to drink, irrigate, and run businesses, industries, and hydropower
plants. Nepal has yet to build resilience against normal annual climate variability, let alone long-run
climate change. Evidence from regional studies has shown that sustained water shortages affect labor
incomes, employment levels, and firm revenue (Damania et al. 2017; Desbureaux and Rodella 2019).
This water insecurity is manifested in Nepal’s energy insecurity and food insecurity.
Moreover, Nepal needs to focus on resilience against water-induced disasters that are predicted to
become more frequent with climate change. Floods, landslides, and droughts have punctuated Nepal’s
development through setbacks to livelihoods and the economy. Without adequate adaptation measures to secure water needs and protect against hydrological disasters, Nepal could suffer significant
economic losses by 2050.

Executive Summary    xiii

Challenge 5: Transboundary Management
Cooperation and treaties between India and Nepal pertaining to water resources date back to the
Exchange of Letters of 1920 with the then-British government in India regarding the Sarada Barrage
project in the Mahakali River, planned for irrigation facilities in the adjacent states (Upreti 2006).
Since then, four other agreements have been signed between the two riparian countries that have been
politically contentious and inadequate in achieving the goals of either country. Both countries have
expressed grievances regarding the management of transboundary issues. While initiating cooperation and addressing grievances will require dedicated efforts from both countries, Nepal needs to first
develop a strong knowledge base and capacity for transboundary management. Since Nepal shares the
basin with China and Bangladesh as well, their cooperation where relevant will also be important for
adequate basin-scale planning.

Priority Areas
All things considered, Nepal is still at the initial stages of development, where it needs to work toward
providing enough water, year-round, for human, economic, and ecosystem needs while addressing the
growing necessity to build climate resilience. There is much to be done in practically every subsector;
however, it is strategic to focus on the following six priority areas as first-order considerations for this
decade. These priorities indicate the need for collaboration within the World Bank and externally with
the government and development partners.

Strengthen state capacity and institutions
First, building state capability for strong governance deserves immediate and sustained policy attention and a multisectoral effort, especially across agriculture, energy, disaster risk management, and the
environment. Budget execution rates have been low, indicating the need for substantial improvement
in implementation capacity. Taking guidance from emerging evidence and assessments such as the
Federalism Capacity Needs Assessment report (World Bank 2019a) Nepal should develop an implementation plan for strengthening water-related governance and service delivery, particularly at the local level.

Maintain Reliable Water Supply and Sanitation Services for Basic and
Economic Needs
The need of the hour is to have enough water for human and economic needs. The lack and poor quality
of services have enormous economic, environmental, and social costs for broad segments of Nepal’s
population. These costs are bound to be amplified by a crisis like COVID-19, especially in the major
urban centers, which have some of the worst water supply infrastructure despite being the country’s
growth engines. The importance of ramping up investments in safe water and sanitation stands out
in the context of this pandemic. Moreover, WSS is one of the fundamental subsectors in which local
governments must be supported in managing public investments.

xiv   GLACIERS, RIVERS, AND SPRINGS: A WATER SECTOR DIAGNOSTIC OF NEPAL

Smooth out Climate Variability for Water Security and Resilience
Although Nepal has begun to tackle the problem of climate extremes, the country still needs investments
that will shield drinking water needs and economic activities from normal annual water variability. The
evidence overwhelmingly points to the need for buffer mechanisms for the dry season, such as smallscale, localized storage and sustainable, multipurpose storage projects. For an integrated approach,
this strategy needs to be complemented with watershed management and continued improvement in
hydrological and meteorological (hydromet) systems.

Boost Agricultural Productivity to Promote Growth and Poverty Reduction
Although the Terai region is already home to most of Nepal’s irrigation investments, it needs to
focus on increasing year-round productivity and commercially viable farming that would be more
conducive to greater economic growth. Expanding larger irrigation schemes as well as groundwater irrigation are important elements for this. Despite a gradual structural change in the economy
away from agriculture, a large proportion of the poor remain reliant on small-holder farming. The
farmer-managed irrigation systems that small farms depend on are weakening due these structural
changes, driven by outward migration and urbanization. Therefore, to reach the poor and vulnerable
who depend on subsistence farming, strengthening irrigation systems is an important issue.

Develop Strong Regulatory Institutions to Enable Effective Private Sector
Investments
Given the massive investment needs and financing gap, private sector participation will have continued importance. Drawing lessons from Nepal’s experience in public-private partnerships in municipal
water supply and the hydropower sector, a politically independent regulator and strong contracting
capabilities for the lifetime of projects constitute the minimum preparedness required for reliable and
efficient private sector engagement.

Build Knowledge on Transboundary Collaboration for Resolving Issues in
Irrigation, Energy, and Flooding
Continued efforts to build knowledge on transboundary cooperation are fundamental to enhancing
basin-level planning and addressing riparian challenges. Water sharing, irrigation, and disaster management all rely on trust and understanding among riparian countries. Resolving these challenges based on
sound evidence and coordination can significantly improve lives and livelihoods in the greater basin.

Notes
1.
2.

Based on a 2011 estimate (WECS 2011).
Based on Multiple Indicator Cluster Surveys (MICSs) 2014 and 2019 (CBS 2015, 2020).

Abbreviations
ADB

Asian Development Bank

BCM

billion cubic meter

COVID-19

Coronavirus Disease 2019

CPF

Country Partnership Framework

DALYs

disability-affected life-years

DPC

development policy credit

DRM

disaster risk management

EWSs

early-warning systems

FMISs

farmer-managed irrigation systems

GCM

global circulation model

GDP

gross domestic product

GoN

Government of Nepal

GW

gigawatt

GWh

gigawatt-hour

ha

hectare

hydromet

hydrological and meteorological

IFC

International Finance Corporation

IWRM

integrated water resource management

xv

xvi   GLACIERS, RIVERS, AND SPRINGS: A WATER SECTOR DIAGNOSTIC OF NEPAL

JICA

Japan International Cooperation Agency

LPCD

liters per capita per day

MoEWRI

Ministry of Energy, Water Resources and Irrigation

MoFE

Ministry of Forests and Environment

MWSP

Melamchi Water Supply Project

NEA

Nepal Electricity Authority

NRW

nonrevenue water

NWSC

National Water Supply Corporation

PPP

public-private partnership

SDG

Sustainable Development Goal

WASH

water supply, sanitation, and hygiene

WECS

Water and Energy Commission Secretariat

WRM

water resource management

WSS

water supply and sanitation

WUSCs

water users and sanitation committees

1
Introduction
Nepal is rich in water resources with a dense network of glaciers, lakes, rivers, and springs that originate
in the Himalayas.1 The country has a high level of annual water availability per capita but harnessing this
has proved to be an uphill battle. Less than 10 percent of total water resources (15 billion cubic meters
[BCM] out of 225 BCM available annually, as per available estimates from 2011) is utilized for economic
and social purposes per year.2 Several factors lie behind this challenge, including rugged geography,
weak institutions, a history of prolonged political instability, and highly skewed seasonality (more than
80 percent of annual precipitation falls within a span of four months). As a result, precipitation patterns
continue to define the rhythm of Nepal’s main economic sectors, namely, agriculture and energy, and
therefore, strong water management is central for its food security and energy security.
As a newly federalized country, Nepal has the potential to redraw its development trajectory, conditional on maintaining a stable political climate. Strengthening water resource management (WRM)
and service delivery are strategic imperatives, but gaps are significant in every domain. An analysis of
water security—which measured water availability across five dimensions (households, the overall
economy, urban areas, the environment, and resilience)—ranks Nepal among the bottom five in all of
Asia (ADB 2016). Nepal was deemed water insecure in each dimension; of a possible score of 20, it got
5.3 for households, 11.3 for the economy, 6.0 for urban areas, 10.7 for the environment, and 4.0 for resilience. Water plays a central role in achieving 15 of the 17 United Nations Sustainable Development Goals
(SDGs) for 2030. Therefore, for sustained economic growth and poverty reduction and to enhance
shared prosperity, Nepal must increase investments in water-related infrastructure and institutions, and
improve the efficacy of these investments. These efforts are doubly important, and challenging, given
rapid urbanization and the growing climate crisis.

1

2   GLACIERS, RIVERS, AND SPRINGS: A WATER SECTOR DIAGNOSTIC OF NEPAL

It is critical for Nepal to adopt an integrated approach to water management with a broader focus on
water security for holistic development, even though hydropower has taken center stage in the past
couple of decades. Since the launch of the National Electricity Crisis Resolution Action Plan 2008,
Nepal renewed its bet on hydropower, with its promise of relieving the country of debilitating electricity
shortages3 and making it energy independent and possibly even a net exporter. The electricity sector’s
performance improved from 2016, as a decade-long political and constitutional process came to an
end. The improved management of existing generation, completion of domestic generation projects,
reduced system losses, and increased electricity imports from India helped eliminate the nationwide
load shedding and brought a decade-long electricity crisis to an end (appendix C).4 However, the prospects for hydropower development over the medium and long term continue to be severely hamstrung
by weak institutional capacity and regulatory barriers. Several current and proposed reforms now seek
to address the barriers that the hydropower sector has faced since the 2000s.5 These reforms are essential for Nepal. Yet, sustainable development will need adequate prioritization of other critical water uses
as well. As the lessons from the Mekong basin (Intralawan et al. 2019; Jusi 2009, 2010; Matthews 2012)
suggest, it will need the adoption of a holistic approach, which entails wider consideration of basic,
economic, and ecosystem needs and the management of water-related climate risks.
Meanwhile, despite apparent progress—based on standard access measures—on the water supply and
sanitation (WSS) front, millions of Nepali people do not have access to reliable, safe drinking water,
especially in the dry winter months. Although 95 percent have some form of technologically improved
drinking water within a 30-minute walking distance, fewer than 15 percent have drinking water that is
free of bacteriological contamination (MoH, New ERA, and ICF 2017). Even the fastest-growing urban
agglomerations such as Kathmandu, Birgunj, and Biratnagar—the main hubs for nonfarm economic
production—have inadequate water, sewer, and waste management infrastructure, and though public
investment in municipal infrastructure is growing, it remains insufficient (Muzzini and Aparicio 2013).
Despite greater access to technologically improved sanitation, proper management of fecal sludge in
both urban and rural areas is largely absent. These service delivery gaps have significant health implications for the population, manifested in the high stunting and anemia rates among children under five
years of age (MoH, New ERA, and ICF 2017).
Agriculture continues to be a gamble, primarily because of the high seasonal variation of rainfall and
limited expansion of reliable irrigation services. The coverage of year-round irrigation is low (39 percent
of irrigated land as per the Irrigation Master Plan 2018) and concentrated in Terai. The contribution
of value-added growth from the agriculture sector has remained below 1.4 percentage points since the
1970s, and many households continue to rely on subsistence farming, trapped in a vicious cycle of poverty (Cosic, Dahal, and Kitzmuller 2017). Competing water uses call for integrated management, which
accounts for trade-offs. For equitable and adequate WRM and water utilization, the country must invest
in ensuring year-round availability of water for domestic, industrial, and agriculture uses and in meeting
the demands of ecosystem services.
This document aims to identify strategic sector priorities—aligned with the Country Partnership
Framework (CPF)—given Nepal’s development context and challenges. It ­considers all water users and
uses necessary for a stronger economy, healthier people, and sustainable ecosystems. Using evidence
from literature, analyses, and consultations, this document highlights the most pressing sector-related
challenges that merit the focus of the World Bank and development partners.

Introduction    3

The rest of the document is organized into three sections. The first section gives a snapshot of Nepal’s
development and situates the water sector in the broader context of the national economy, highlighting
the importance of managing water resources for sustained economic growth and poverty reduction.
The next section expands on five pressing water sector challenges. The document concludes with a set
of priority areas in the sector for this decade.

Notes
1.

2.
3.

4.

5.

Situated at the headwaters of the Ganges basin, more than 6,000 rivers originate and flow through Nepal. On
aggregate, annual averages show that Nepal has one of the highest water availability levels per capita in the
world, at about 7,000 cubic meters.
Based on an estimate from WECS (2011).
The decade-long electricity crisis that ended in 2015 cost the economy up to 7 percent of its gross ­domestic
product annually (Timilsina, Sapkota, and Steinbuks 2018). The government came up with the National
­Electricity Crisis Resolution Action Plan 2008 to drive up generation by 10 gigawatts.
Domestic hydropower generation increased by about 72 percent from 2008 to 2020, though ending the
­electricity crisis took an upsurge in imports of more than 500 percent and a reduction in transmission and
distribution losses of more than 10 percentage points. This information is based on data obtained from
­hydropower generation summaries from the Nepal Electricity Authority Annual Reports 2016/17, 2017/18,
and 2018/19 (NEA 2017, 2018, and 2019). In 2008, domestic generation was 2,752 gigawatt-hours (GWh) and
­imports were 425 GWh. In 2019, domestic generation was 4,728 GWh and imports were 2,813 GWh. ­Domestic
­hydropower generation includes NEA production and purchases from independent power producers.
A ­complete timeline is available in appendix C.
The World Bank’s Development Policy Credit (DPC) for the energy sector aims to reform institutions including the NEA.

2
Where Are We?
Water and Nepal’s Development
This section briefly discusses Nepal’s development context and situates the role of the water sector in
its economy.

Legacy of a High-Remittance, Low-Growth Trap
Nepal was in a low-growth trap for more than a decade, with an average GDP growth rate of 4.4 percent
between 2007 and 2017, mostly attributable to growth in the service sector. There are welcome signs of
the economy benefiting from the peace dividend and subsequent political stability. Economic growth
picked up to more than 6.0 percent per year until 2020, when the 2019 coronavirus (COVID-19) was
designated a pandemic, but primarily driven by consumption instead of investments. Contributions
to growth from agriculture and industry have remained stagnant (Cosic, Dahal, and Kitzmuller 2017).
Instead, information and communication technology and tourism have emerged as significant contributors to economic growth. Political instability has been a driving factor of Nepal’s economic woes;
as an example, the country went through 22 governing coalitions in 26 years.1 The problems of its
economy are manifest in the plight of droves of labor migrants who have left in search of livelihoods
abroad; between 2008 and 2017, Nepal issued 4 million labor permits for outbound migration.2 Most
of the poverty reduction that occurred between 1995 and 2011 is attributable to the rise in labor migration that resulted in more remittance transfers and higher labor incomes. Remittances have grown to
5

6   GLACIERS, RIVERS, AND SPRINGS: A WATER SECTOR DIAGNOSTIC OF NEPAL

about 30 percent of GDP, the fifth highest remittance-to-GDP ratio in the world, and this steady flow of
foreign exchange allows Nepal to rely heavily on imports from other c­ ountries. However, remittances
have suffered because of the COVID-19 pandemic, as have tourism earnings, leaving Nepal exposed to
economic decline. Nevertheless, conditional on a more stable political climate, the country can take the
right steps to lessen the blow of the crisis. Its medium-term transition to productivity-led growth can
partly be driven by coordinated investments in water-related infrastructure, in addition to the necessary
crisis response.

Investments in Hydropower
For Nepal to meet its goal of reaching a middle-income status by 2030, it needs to boost i­ nvestments
significantly—by about 10 to 15 percent of GDP annually through 2030 (Ezemenari and Joshi 2019).
The country aims for rapid hydropower development as a part of that goal.3 As of 2019, pipeline
investments in hydropower totaling at least 2.6 gigawatts were under construction—worth about
13 percent of GDP4—and at least another 2.8 gigawatts were awaiting financial closure.5 If the projects
already under construction successfully come into operation, it would increase generation capacity
twofold, and if all pipeline projects go through, this would mean a fivefold increase. Increased electricity availability would also mean a better balance of payments through decreased oil and electricity
imports. However, the lessons since the 2000s—on why the subsector has failed to thrive despite of
all the planning and resources that has been dedicated to it—highlight the importance of the ongoing
institutional reforms that could create the necessary enabling environment. These reforms will be
crucial for improving planning and implementation capacity. Alongside hydropower, several other
water-related investments are necessary to boost growth.

Water Supply and Sanitation Services Insufficient for Human or
Economic Needs
To improve competitiveness and create domestic jobs, Nepal also needs to expand safe and reliable
water supply for domestic, agricultural, and industrial use. The country faces major challenges in providing WSS services in both rural and urban areas. Although some small towns are making laudable
progress on water supply and fecal sludge management in particular,6 larger urban areas continue to
suffer despite their outsized role in economic growth. Kathmandu has the worst municipal water infrastructure in terms of supply hours, and public investment in municipal infrastructure has been shown
to be biased against the city (Muzzini and Aparicio 2013). Based on one study, households in the capital
received only about four hours of water supply per week in 2015, on average (Shrestha et al. 2017). Urban
residents increasingly rely on underregulated groundwater and tanker water with uncertain quality. In
rural areas, the functionality of water schemes is low because of prevailing institutional and financial
constraints. The lack of water supply on household premises, poor access to safe water in crowded
urban spaces, and reliance on public taps means that Nepali people face a higher risk of exposure during
public health crises such as the COVID-19 pandemic. Sanitation services have been improving, but only
7 percent of the national population has access to a private sewer connection (MoH, New ERA, and ICF
2017). Wastewater management is practically nonexistent in urban areas. Safe fecal sludge management
is relatively absent, with serious public health consequences.

Where Are We? Water and Nepal’s Development    7

Nepal’s Human Capital Index estimates that a child born in Nepal today will be only 49 percent as
productive when she grows up as she could have been if she enjoyed a complete education and full
health care (Ezemenari and Joshi 2019). In a scenario in which all Nepali children receive full education
and good health services, Nepal’s GDP could be as much as two times larger than the GDP under the
status quo scenario. Realizing the full potential of the country’s human capital would require a sharp
reduction in stunting, which is as high as 36 percent based on the 2016 Demographic and Health Survey
estimates (MoH, New ERA, and ICF 2017). Although data and evidence are sparse on the costs to economic growth of poor water supply, sanitation, and hygiene (WASH), the additional expenditure that
households and businesses make to gain access to safe water indicates that the poor quality of services
has considerable direct and indirect toll on the economy.

Poverty Reduction and GDP Growth Hinge on Agricultural
Productivity Growth
The agriculture sector remains responsible for the largest share of the GDP (27 percent) and of formal
jobs (22 percent), based on the Nepal Labour Force Survey 2017/18 (CBS 2019). If we are to include
employment in informal and subsistence agriculture, then its share of jobs rises to about 65 percent.7
With nearly 40 percent of the labor force trapped in subsistence agriculture, sustained poverty alleviation needs improvements in agricultural productivity and farm incomes. This, among other factors,
hinges on consistent and reliable water for irrigation and adequate conservation of forests and watersheds (World Bank 2019e), which are key determinants of water availability, especially in the mountain
regions.
In a largely agrarian economy such as Nepal’s, adequate water provision requires expanded and
­reliable irrigation facilities, implemented in tandem with complementary agricultural and watershed
­interventions. There has been little improvement in the productivity of agriculture since the 1970s. It
is common to find macroeconomic outlooks citing weather as the prime predictor of sectoral output:
for example, “assuming normal monsoons, agricultural growth is expected to average 4.4 percent”
(Ezemenari and Joshi 2019, 2). This goes to show the extent to which the economy is exposed to
climate shocks because of the lack of water storage and distribution infrastructure to buffer against
intraannual climate variability. As highlighted in a 2017 macroeconomic report (Cosic, Dahal, and
Kitzmuller 2017), reforms are needed in the agriculture space to alleviate poverty, improve productivity, and release the labor force to leverage new sources of growth.

Notes
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

From 1990 to 2016 (see Jha 2016).
Based on the National Migration Report (MoLESS 2020).
The government of Nepal announced its plan in 2016: National Energy Crisis Reduction and Electricity
­ evelopment Decade 2016–2026 (GoN 2016c).
D
Assuming US$1.5 million per megawatt, at 2019 GDP for US$29.8 billion (nominal).
The Nepal Electricity Authority Annual Report 2018/19 (NEA 2019), regarding independent power producer
and NEA projects under construction as well as pipeline projects.

8   GLACIERS, RIVERS, AND SPRINGS: A WATER SECTOR DIAGNOSTIC OF NEPAL

6.
7.

Based on ADB’s Small Towns Water Supply and Sanitation Project reports: https://www.adb.org/sites/default​
/files/evaluation-document/614201/files/pvr-688.pdf.
Based on the 2008 Labor Force Survey (LFS), which includes subsistence agriculture workers as part of the
labor force. They are not included in the 2018 survey (CBS 2008, 2019).

3
What Are the Challenges?
The following five challenges capture some of the main hurdles in water-related service delivery and
harnessing water resources for Nepal’s sustainable development.

Challenge 1: Service Delivery in Water Supply and Sanitation
As the coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic spreads across the world, Nepal, like many
other developing countries, is faced with the hard reality that a significant portion of its population is
unable to follow the basic guidelines for pandemic prevention, such as handwashing and social distancing. Those who live in crowded slums with poor access to water and sanitation and those who rely
on public taps for water are invariably more vulnerable. Developing water supply services to provide
sufficient clean water throughout the year for basic human and economic needs is an indispensable part
of the development process. Quality, quantity, and reliability of drinking water supply are significant
challenges in both rural and urban areas. By the Sustainable Development Goal (SDG) basic standard,
95 percent of Nepal’s population has access to technologically improved sources of drinking water,
of which 31 percent have piped water within premises (MoH, New ERA, and ICF 2017; GoN 2019).
The access figures are comparable between rural and urban areas. However, these statistics do not
meaningfully convey the status of water services in the country.

9

10   GLACIERS, RIVERS, AND SPRINGS: A WATER SECTOR DIAGNOSTIC OF NEPAL

MAP 3.1 Greatest Absolute Increases in Built-Up Areas, Kathmandu and Surrounding
Districts, 2000–14

Change in built-up area
Decrease
No change
10%–20%
20%–50%
>50% increase
(Built-up area <0.5 square kilometers)
Source: World Bank Cartography Unit, using World Bank (2019f and Pesaresi et al. 2015).

Low functionality, limited quantity and reliability
One of the most salient problems in water service provision is the low functionality of existing infrastructure, which has affected the adequate and reliable delivery of drinking water. A nationwide functionality study found that in a sample of 41,205 piped water supply schemes, only 25.4 percent were
described as well functioning and 31.8 percent did not have year-round supply (GoN 2014b). Most
needed major repair, rehabilitation, or reconstruction or were beyond repair. About 20 to 25 percent
of the water sources in the rural midhills have dried up since 2000, with disproportionate effects
on low-income households and women, on whom the burden of water collection falls more heavily
(Gurung et al. 2019).
In urban areas, an official report on the 26 biggest urban utilities showed that on average, supply hours
vary from 2 to 12 hours per day with an average of 6.5 hours per day (GoN 2016a, figure 3.1). However, in
some of the largest cities, such as Kathmandu, an estimate showed that water is supplied intermittently,
for only one to four hours over a period of three to six days (Udmale et al. 2016). Similarly, another
study estimates about 4 hours of water supply per week, which was further reduced to 2.3 hours after
the April 2015 earthquake because of the damage sustained to pipe infrastructure (Shrestha et al. 2017).
Rapid urbanization is likely to worsen the pressures on water infrastructure. Whereas Nepal is one
of the 10 least urbanized countries in the world, it is also one of the top 10 fastest-urbanizing countries (Bakrania 2015). The greatest absolute increases in built-up areas are around Kathmandu and
surrounding districts (Pesaresi et al. 2016; map 3.1).1 The severe water deficit in Kathmandu has
meant that there isn’t sufficient water to meet the demands for basic needs and less for industries,

What Are the Challenges?    11

businesses, and agriculture. The average domestic water consumption in Kathmandu was found to
be 36.9 ± 11.1 liters per capita per day (LPCD; Pasakhala et al. 2013), which is well below the 50 LPCD
recommended as the minimum water requirement for basic needs (Gleick 1996) and the 135 LPCD
that the government aims to provide (Udmale et al. 2016). (See box 3.1 for details on the valley and
the Melamchi project intended to increase supply.) On aggregate, the deficit is so severe that water
supply is reported to meet less than 32 percent of household demand in the wet season and less than
19 percent in the dry season (Thapa et al. 2018). This finding is corroborated by official statistics on
the 26 largest urban utilities, where the capital places last in terms of per capita water consumption
(GoN 2016a).

BOX 3.1 State of Water Service Delivery and Cost of Shortages in Kathmandu
Kathmandu, the densest and fastest-growing urban center in Nepal, has about 200,000 household
connections and a coverage rate of 80 percent (GoN 2016a). By comparison, the second-largest
city, Pokhara, has about 36,000 connections and a coverage rate of 70 percent. The capital’s water
utility (Kathmandu Upatyaka Khanepani Limited) meets about 31 percent of water demand in the
wet season and about 19 percent in the dry season (Thapa et al. 2018). On average, water supply
is reportedly available for only four hours a week, although official statistics claim two hours per day
(Shrestha et al. 2017). A major project under way since the early 2000s, the first phase of the Melamchi Water Supply Project (MWSP), would alleviate some of the shortage for basic water needs. Yet
it would still leave a considerable gap vis-à-vis the 135 LPCD requirement, with significant disparities
across the valley (Thapa et al. 2018; map B3.1.1). However, in 2021, demand is estimated to outstrip
supply even in the baseline scenario, after the completion of phase 1 of the MWSP as water demand
is projected to rise by 31 percent by 2021 compared with 2016 (445 million liters per day; Udmale
et al. 2016. Building on prior work (Thapa et al. 2018) the Kathmandu Valley Water Supply Management Board (KVWSMB) is in the process of conducting a comprehensive water security mapping
for the whole valley that is expected to shed light on the extent of the need and potential sustainable
interventions. Municipal spending is extremely low and biased against Kathmandu, but it deserves
greater attention because it is the biggest economic hub and the fastest-growing agglomeration that
pulls in the most domestic migrants (Muzzini and Aparicio 2013).
Alternative sources—such as rainwater, tubewells, tanker water, public taps, private storage, and informal water markets—and limiting consumption have been the main coping mechanisms. This scarcity
has driven households to pump groundwater, which is reported to have high levels of arsenic, ammonia,
iron, nitrates, and E. coli (Muzzini and Aparicio 2013). A survey of 120 water vendors and 1,500 households shows that less than 20 percent of the population in the Kathmandu Valley receive reliable drinking water supply (Raina et al. 2019). The survey finds a heavy dependence on informal water service
providers for domestic needs and that the national law requiring licensure for commercial water vendors
was not enforced. In the dry season, consumers paid up to 3.4 times the price of public piped water
to buy water from informal vendors (Raina et al. 2019). In addition to purchasing costs, households
bear further costs of coping, such as collecting from multiple sources, pumping, treating, and storing.
These costs can amount to as much as twice the monthly water utility bills (Pattanayak et al. 2005).
This finding reveals not only the significant economic costs of water scarcity but also the high revenue
potential associated with improved public service delivery of water.
(continued)

12   GLACIERS, RIVERS, AND SPRINGS: A WATER SECTOR DIAGNOSTIC OF NEPAL

BOX 3.1 (continued)
MAP B3.1.1 Household Water Security Index, MWSP, Current and after First Phase
a. Current (50 LPCD)

b. Current (135 LPCD)

Household water security index
>2.5
1.51–2.50
1.01–1.50
0.76–1.00
0.51–0.75
0.26–0.50
0.01–0.25
District boundaries
c. After 1st phase of MWSP (50 LPCD)

d. After 1st phase of MWSP (135 LPCD)

Source: Thapa et al. 2018
Note: LPCD = liters per capita per day; MWSP = Melamchi Water Supply Project.

But this problem is not unique to Kathmandu; although secondary and smaller towns fare better in
terms of per capita water consumption and supply hours per day, their coverage rates are lower. The
National Water Supply Corporation (NWSC) has been providing water supply services in 22 urban areas
outside the Kathmandu Valley. As the populations in towns have grown rapidly, NWSC has been confronted with institutional and management capacity constraints to meeting growing water demands.
The draft Urban Water Supply and Sanitation Sector Policy 2014 (drafted by the Ministry of Urban
Development) lists several problems facing urban utilities: poor supply coverage, low supply pressure,
intermittent supply, poor water quality, high levels of nonrevenue water (NRW), and low customer

What Are the Challenges?    13

satisfaction (GoN 2016a). The average NRW for the 26 cities assessed is about 40 percent, and none of
them has 24-hour water supply (figure 3.1). Water service providers across all provinces are operating on
decreasing returns to scale; on average, resources are spent at 63 percent efficiency (World Bank 2019b).
Policy interventions to address these infrastructure constraints in Nepal’s strategic urban growth centers will also be important for industrial expansion.
The poor quality of service delivery has driven households to rely on other sources, such as rainwater,
tubewells, and informal water markets, and to limit water consumption to a basic minimum. However,
coping measures tend to be different for lower-income households that cannot afford expensive
vended water, own large water storage tanks, or use a rainwater harvesting system. Poorer households
tend to spend more time collecting water from different sources and to reduce water consumption
further by limiting usage to drinking, cooking, and basic hygiene, as well as reusing gray water generated from laundry, bathing, and dishwashing (Pasakhala et al. 2013). This practice carries health risks,
highlighting the need for targeted interventions to improve equitable and inclusive service delivery. So
far, the government’s efforts have not reached the bottom quintiles of the income distribution as much
as the top ones. An analysis of public expenditure in the water sector shows that the benefits of government spending on WSS services have been regressive (World Bank 2019b). The bottom 20 ­percent of
the population (in terms of wealth distribution) received only a 12 percent and an 11 percent share of
the benefits of sewer connections and piped water, respectively, whereas the top 20 percent received
33 percent in each category.

a. NRW

Gausala
Mahendra
Pokhara
Butwal
Taulihawa
Jaleswor
Lahan
Bhairahawa
Biratnagar
Dharan
Kalaiya
Average
Krishnanagar
Nepalgunj
Rajbiraj
Bharatpur
Hetauda
Bahadurgunj
Banepa
Gaur
Malangwa
Kathmandu
Bhadrapur
Birgunj
Dhangadi
Janakpur

65

38
City

City

FIGURE 3.1 NRW and Supply Hours, Nepali Cities, 2014–15

12
0

10

20

30

40

50

Production-consumption (%)

Source: GoN 2016a.
Note: NRW = nonrevenue water.

60

70

b. Supply hours

Dhangadi
Bharatpur
Birgunj
Biratnagar
Mahendra
Bhadrapur
Bhairahawa
Kalaiya
Malangwa
Gaur
Average
Jaleswor
Butwal
Taulihawa
Nepalgunj
Hetauda
Krishnanagar
Lahan
Dharan
Gausala
Bahadurgunj
Pokhara
Rajbiraj
Janakpur
Kathmandu
Banepa

12

7

2

0

2

4

6

8

10

Supply (hours/day)

12

14

14   GLACIERS, RIVERS, AND SPRINGS: A WATER SECTOR DIAGNOSTIC OF NEPAL

Poor water quality and its consequences
Another problem with water supply in Nepal is its poor quality. Only a small fraction of those with technologically improved sources have access to safe drinking water, devoid of bacteriological or chemical
contamination. A nationally representative survey from 2019 estimated that the percentage of households with safe drinking water without Escherichia coli contamination was as low as 19.1 percent, a slight
improvement from 14.5 percent in 2014.2 In 2014, only 50 percent of the 26 urban utilities had a water
quality monitoring system in place, and although all of them had chlorination units, their application
and maintenance were irregular (GoN 2016a). Households invest in chemicals, ceramic filters, boiling, and reverse osmosis-ultraviolet water purification, among other treatment methods. One estimate
shows that the monthly cost of treating 9 liters a day was about US$3.30 (380 Nepalese rupees) per
household, which adds a significant burden for poor households (Shrestha et al. 2018). Geogenic contamination, primarily caused by arsenic, is prevalent in many regions. A blanket test carried out in 25
districts in Nepal, yielding about 737,009 samples of groundwater, found that close to 10 percent of the
water samples had an arsenic concentration of more than 10 micrograms per liter, which is more than
the permissible limit set by the World Health Organization (Thakur et al. 2011). Almost 2.6 million of
the country’s population across the 25 districts included in the study are at risk of exposure to arsenic
through contaminated groundwater sources.

Inadequate sanitation and wastewater management
The shortage of clean water also impinges on the progress in sanitation and hygiene. Nepal saw a 45
percent increase in access to improved sanitation facilities from 2006 to 2016, based on data from the
Demographic and Health Survey 2016, but the lack of adequate running water continues to be a barrier
in reaping the full benefits of this improvement in sanitation. In 2016, 82 percent of the population
had improved sanitation access, of which 7 percent were connected to a private sewer network, and 18
percent of the population still relied on unimproved sanitation, of which 16 percent resorted to open
defecation. Having pushed through its mission to eliminate open defecation after the 2009 cholera
outbreak, the government declared Nepal “open defecation free” in 2019, but experts agree that maintaining this status is a challenge (Rodriguez 2019).
Although Nepal envisions climbing up the sanitation ladder to increase private sewer connections, this
will not be possible without adequate wastewater treatment. According to the WHO/UNICEF Joint
Monitoring Programme (JMP) definition, safely managed sanitation should account for the proper
treatment of excreta in-situ, off-site or through treated wastewater. Improvements in sanitation services
will remain incomplete and ineffectual at improving health outcomes so long as proper fecal sludge and
wastewater management are not implemented in both rural and urban areas. An estimated 42 percent
of the urban population in Nepal have access to safely managed sanitation as of 2020 (WHO/UNICEF
2020). None of the municipalities, other than Kathmandu and Hetauda, have wastewater treatment
facilities (GoN 2016a). Hetauda’s facility is deemed to be nonfunctional, whereas Kathmandu has one
functional facility out of four, which can handle less than 5 percent of the city’s sewage, although a
project to improve capacity to 80 percent is under way (ADB 2013). In rural areas, containment and
safe disposal of fecal sludge need significant scaling up. It is estimated that only about half of the rural
population in Nepal have access to safely managed sanitation as of 2020 (WHO/UNICEF 2020).

What Are the Challenges?    15

The human capital costs of poor water supply, sanitation, and hygiene (WASH) are high and are manifested in poor maternal and child health, with lasting consequences for the productivity and earnings
of the next generation. In Nepal, 36 percent of children under the age of five are stunted. The poor are
the worst affected; stunting among children from the lowest wealth quintile is 49 percent compared
with 17 percent among the highest wealth quintile. Poor sanitation is also an important contributor
to low hemoglobin and anemia in children under the age of five (Coffey, Geruso, and Spears 2017).
Data from the World Health Organization attributes 310.2 d
­ isability-affected life-years (DALYs) to
exposure to inadequate WASH in Nepal, comprising 3 percent of the total DALYs. Despite declines
in WASH-attributable mortality, inadequate WASH remains an important determinant of the disease
burden, especially among young children. One estimate shows that approximately 3,500 children die
of waterborne diseases every year (Aryal et al. 2012). The incidence of high levels of food poverty,
stunting, and diarrhea, which overlap with areas of widespread unimproved drinking water or poor
sanitation access, is highest in the westernmost regions (map 3.2). Despite a sizable reduction since
MAP 3.2 Districts Vulnerable to High Levels of Food Poverty, Stunting, and Diarrhea with
Unimproved Drinking Water or Poor Sanitation Access
Unimproved drinking water access
versus food proverty prevalence

Unimproved sanitation access
versus food proverty prevalence

Unimproved drinking water access
versus stunting prevalence

Unimproved sanitation access
versus stunting prevalence

Unimproved drinking water access
versus diarrhea prevalence

High. hig
Low. hig
High. low
Low. low

Unimproved sanitation access
versus diarrhea prevalence

High. hig
Low. hig
High. low
Low. low

Source: World Bank Cartography Unit using Haslett et al. (2014), and Nepal National Population and Housing Census (2011).

16   GLACIERS, RIVERS, AND SPRINGS: A WATER SECTOR DIAGNOSTIC OF NEPAL

2006, inadequate WASH remains high; in 2015, direct economic losses resulting from forgone labor
output were an estimated US$76.8 million, which represented about 0.4 percent of GDP including
welfare losses. (Kaczan, Chen, and Arin 2019). With safely managed WASH as per SDG conditions,
these costs could fall to less than US$3.0 million by 2030 (Kaczan, Chen, and Arin 2019).

Pending policies and legislation holding back progress
The legislation and policies necessary for the mandates of the Ministry of Water Supply (MoWS, formed
in 2015, once a department under the former Ministry of Water Resources) have not been finalized, leaving considerable uncertainty among stakeholders in the sector, amid an ongoing federal transition. The
GoN drafted a water sector development plan (SDP) for the period of 2016–30, which shows a US$10
billion financing requirement to achieve the SDGs (GoN 2016b). However, implementation modalities
are unclear. WSS projects for populations larger than 1,000 will be under MoWS, whereas those smaller
than that number will be under the Ministry of Federal Affairs and Local Development. The NWSC will
be the operator of large urban schemes, whereas the operators for towns and rural schemes will be
water users and sanitation committees (WUSCs). But the draft SDP gives WUSCs several overlapping
roles (as the operator, service provider, regulator, monitor, fundraiser, and manager)—which, as global
experience shows, is a recipe for poor performance and inefficiency—while leaving out details for integrating the role of municipal governments in WSS service delivery.

Persistence in patterns of social exclusion based on caste and gender
Despite significant progress, there are gender, caste, ethnicity, and locational disparities in the level
of access to WSS services. The access rates for basic improved water, and basic water on household
premises are lower in hill regions than the Terai (owing to the feasibility of tubewells in the plains),
but within each region, the marginalized caste of Dalits have lower rates of access than other castes:
only 54 percent of hill Dalits have access to basic water on premises, compared to around 60 percent
or more for other hill castes and the national average of 70 percent (CBS 2020). The lack of proper
monitoring systems and disaggregated data to fully capture the change in the livelihoods of women
and marginalized communities is part of the challenge (Shrestha and Clement 2019).
Although caste-based discrimination has been outlawed, the concepts of purity, or the lack thereof,
rooted in broadly adopted religious beliefs, continue to inform social norms on the rights and access of
women and Dalits to water, which contribute in perpetuating legacies of poverty and inequality based on
gender and caste. Traditionally, Dalits were considered too impure to be given access to public water taps
used by “higher” castes. Although overt exclusion is less common today in fast-urbanizing spaces, such
legacies continue in different forms, including in the inability of Dalits to obtain prior use rights like other
groups (Shrestha, Joshi, and Roth 2020). In locations with increasing scarcity, quarrels or social conflicts
over water rights are common (Goodrich et al. 2017). When compounded by the lack of economic, social,
and political capital to invest in new infrastructure or negotiate for their rights, Dalits tend to lose out on
existing access or on obtaining new sources of access (Shrestha, Joshi, and Roth 2020).
Their underrepresentation in water-related decision-making is part of the problem. Just a decade ago,
as of 2011, a survey found that of the 1,511 employees of the Department of Water Supply and Sanitation,

What Are the Challenges?    17

94 percent were men, 2 percent Dalit, and 61 percent Brahmin/Chhetri, and there was no staff or structure with dedicated responsibility for gender and inclusion (ADB, DFID, and World Bank 2011). The
GoN has since introduced gender and social inclusion provisions in the new Constitution and recent
policies (such as the Irrigation Regulation 1999, National Sanitation and Hygiene Master Plan 2011, and
draft WASH Sector Development Plan 2016–30), to increase representation and participation of women
and marginalized communities in water-related decision-making, which continues to lag (Shrestha and
Clement 2019; Goodrich et al. 2017). Though insufficient to date, relevant legal and policy measures
and participatory planning are critical to combat issues that stem from entrenched patriarchal and
caste-based norms.

Challenge 2: Water Governance for Service Delivery and
Integrated Management in a Federal Framework
The water sector’s governance requires substantial progress in institutional, policy, and legal aspects.
Much of the legal framework necessary remains pending. The Water Resources Act and the Water
Supply and Sanitation Act have yet to be finalized. Similarly, the corresponding policies and sector
development plans have remained drafts for the past few years.
With the new federal structure, the roles and responsibilities of each tier of government have
changed, though the transformation is not fully realized. The Local Governance Operation Act 2017
places the responsibility for providing safe water, sanitation, irrigation, and disaster mitigation services on local bodies, whereas the provincial and federal tiers of government are relegated to more of
a planning and coordination role. How this will be merged with the previous acts—such as the 1992
Water Resources Act or the 1990 Nepal Water Supply Corporation (NWSC) Act, which grants authority over service delivery, human resources decisions, and asset ownership to water user committees
and corporations—remains to be addressed.
Apart from these emerging legal challenges, Nepal faces three major institutional constraints: (1) low
capacity for service delivery of local governments; (2) trade-offs in water allocation across subsectors; and (3) implementation of an integrated water resource management in a federal framework.

Low state capability for service delivery in a newly created administrative system
The federal transition poses both opportunities and challenges. The opportunities include added
accountability and ownership at the local level—in program formulation, planning, design, implementation, and operation and maintenance (O&M)—because of reduced information asymmetries and
proximity to the clientele. Among others, the challenges arise from the institutional vacuum and weak
linkages of accountability left by the absence of local elections for almost two decades.3 Overall, since
the federal transition, the national and local governments were not able to spend a significant portion
of the budgeted allocations primarily because of a lack of capacity (World Bank 2019a). Effective local
governance would need significant support to build administrative capacity for service delivery and
WRM. Box 3.2 illustrates this challenge for one newly formed municipality, Birendranagar.

18   GLACIERS, RIVERS, AND SPRINGS: A WATER SECTOR DIAGNOSTIC OF NEPAL

BOX 3.2 Institutional Challenges of a Newly Formed Municipality under the Federal System
Birendranagar municipality, formed as a part of the federalization process, had a population of about
48,000 as of 2020. It is the planning authority for the water and sanitation sector within the municipality’s borders and is still in the process of preparing its master plan. Moreover, the municipality plays
the regulator’s role concerning tariff issues. It collects some of its budget locally but relies heavily on
transfers from the central government. It needs to coordinate with the provincial Infrastructure Development Directorate for resource allocation and monitoring. Located within the Surkhet Valley, its water
supply and sanitation services are managed and operated by the Surkhet Valley Water Users Committee
(SVWUC). It has a piped service for potable water, while sanitation services are at an early stage of
development with individual septic tanks and fecal sludge collection. The water source is insufficient and
features seasonal fluctuations, meeting only 50 percent of the design capacity during the dry season,
resulting in low continuity of water supply, ranging from at the most three hours per day during the wet
season to less than one hour per day in the dry season. It also has a high rate of technical nonrevenue
water. Amid these service delivery challenges, these are some key institutional questions Birendranagar
faces:

• Status of SVWUC. How can SVWUC’s status change to move toward taking full responsibility

of the development of the water supply and sanitation sector or will they integrate within the
municipality that is now ultimately responsible for WSS delivery?

• Funding of water supply and sanitation projects. What is the best ownership, funding, and investment strategy for water source assets, considering the low level of funding capacity at the municipality level?

• Access to additional water resources. What are the most cost-effective solutions for augmenting bulk
water supply to meet current and future domestic demand?

• Nonrevenue water reduction. What strategies can be implemented to reduce leakages?
• Expansion of network and service. How can coverage be improved for Surkhet residents while expanding the revenue base for financially sustainable operations?

Source: World Bank 2020.

Strengthening state capability for water governance is key to reaching Nepal’s service delivery goals.
Poor regulatory, institutional, and policy frameworks are overarching factors that appear to drive
poor functionality of water, sanitation, and irrigation services, as well as hydropower development.
The degree of WSS nonfunctionality indicates a lack of adequate planning, oversight, and regulation
and an absence of continued support systems to assist users’ committees. The public expenditure
review results show that water service providers in Nepal are operating on decreasing returns to scale
(World Bank 2019b). On average, one-third of resources spent were lost through inefficiencies in
­fiscal year 2017/18 (World Bank 2019b). Moreover, there is significant underspending of the capital
budget, averaging 70 to 80 percent of the amount budgeted in the WSS sector and about 7 percent
in the irrigation sector (figure 3.2). This finding suggests a low absorptive capacity in the sector,
­compared to what is necessary for the implementation of investments. With local governments
responsible for planning and implementation, and given their limited experience and capacity, these
issues are likely to intensify without adequate support.

What Are the Challenges?    19

BOX 3.3 Governance Lessons from the National Electricity Crisis Resolution Action Plan 2008
In 2008, amid a debilitating electricity crisis, the Government of Nepal (GoN) attempted to bring in
private investment for large-scale hydropower development. The National Electricity Crisis Resolution
Action Plan 2008 aimed to build 10 gigawatts (GW) of hydropower generation capacity within 10 years.
The former Ministry of Water Resources was split into the Ministry of Energy and Ministry of Irrigation
soon after in 2009 (those ministries were merged into the Ministry of Energy, Water Resources and
Irrigation in 2018; the Department of Water Supply and Sanitation, which was also under the same
ministry, was turned into a separate ministry in 2015). Survey licenses were given away for 450 sites
(ADB 2010), of which 292 are more than 1 megawatt, with little transparency regarding project selection or coordination with other water resource projects. (Map B.3.3.1 shows the array of hydropower
plants under operation, construction, or survey as of 2015 across the country.) The 2008 plan barely
reached 4 percent of its goal by 2018.

MAP B.3.3.1 Hydropower Plants under Operation, Construction, or Survey, as of 2014

Source: World Bank Cartography Unit using GoN (2014c).
Note: MW = megawatts.

The plan did not succeed in achieving its 10 GW goal primarily due to political instability and several
institutional weaknesses, such as poor planning and a poor process for engaging private participation
that led to stalled projects. The difficulty in attracting financing—because of the electricity utility’s
poor financial health and political risks—was also a major barrier. These governance lessons5 provide
important guidance for the government’s current 10 GW plan, the National Energy Crisis Reduction
and Electricity Development Decade 2016–2026 (GoN 2016c). The ongoing river basin master planning for hydroelectricity and the World Bank’s Nepal Energy Sector Development Policy Credit Series
aim to tackle many binding constraints to enable successful investments. However, these reforms will
take time. In the medium term, the private sector will continue to face strong headwinds in mobilizing finance for larger projects, which puts the burden of undertaking larger projects—such as storage
­projects—on the public sector.

20   GLACIERS, RIVERS, AND SPRINGS: A WATER SECTOR DIAGNOSTIC OF NEPAL

FIGURE 3.2 Underutilization of Budget
Allocations, 2015–18
Percentage of budget

Massive delays in project completion and
high time/cost overruns also indicate poor
capacity and institutional weaknesses. The
10%
20
average time needed to complete an irrigation
0
or hydropower project is 16 or 9 years, respec–20
–9%
–11%
–19%
tively (Cosic, Dahal, and Kitzmuller 2017).4
–40
–60
The longest-standing projects in the construc–63%
–80
tion phase in these sectors have been 38 or
–100
18 years, respectively. As a comparison, con–97%
–120
struction time for smaller hydropower projFY2015/16
FY2016/17
FY2017/18
ects should typically take 9 to 18 months and
WSS
Irrigation
for medium and larger ones, up to four years
(IFC 2015). The MWSP for Kathmandu has
Source: World Bank 2019b.
Note: WSS = water supply and sanitation.
been ongoing since 2001, which exemplifies
the systemic delays that are pervasive across
the sector. Cost overruns are also routine; the ratio is estimated to be approximately 1 to 4, on average,
for planned to actual costs for large hydropower projects (Plummer and Guthrie 2016). None of the
eight must-have institutional features of an effective public investment management system are present
in Nepal (Plummer and Guthrie 2016). The missing features in Nepal include critical functions such
as project selection, budgeting, project implementation, adjustment of projects in construction, and
ex post evaluation. Building the institutional capacities for these functions is a necessary step toward
better water governance.
However, the World Bank and donor engagement in the sector overall has largely focused on project implementation, and policy dialogue has been limited. (Development partner engagements are
summarized in appendix A.)

Managing trade-offs among different uses of Nepal’s water resources
Water resources have various competing uses and are important to several economic sectors. A successful hydropower sector is vital to Nepal, yet it is only one piece of the country’s development puzzle.
As the experience of the Lao People’s Democratic Republic (PDR) shows, the country’s a­ mbitions to
become the “battery of Asia” through the production of hydroelectricity for exports revealed significant
institutional weaknesses (Greacen and Palettu 2007) with major effects on both economic and hydrological spheres (Intralawan et al. 2019; Jusi 2010). The country has since moved to adopt an IWRM
strategy to improve WRM alongside hydropower development.
For Nepal too, there are trade-offs among different water uses, and the country stands to gain
more from optimizing project selection and design so as to meet multiple objectives, accounting
for the water-energy-food nexus, upstream-downstream linkages, and environmental flow requirements (Dhaubanjar, Davidsen, and Bauer-Gottwein 2017). Multipurpose water infrastructure has
the potential to maximize overall resource use efficiency and productivity across sectors (Gyawali
2015). Unlike Lao PDR, Nepal is still in the initial phases of hydropower development and can
prioritize hydropower investments based on an integrated approach. The efforts of the Water and
Energy Commission Secretariat (WECS), which launched the river basin-scale master plan for water

What Are the Challenges?    21

resource and hydropower development in 2018, is a promising step in the direction of integrated
development (Lahmeyer International 2018).

Challenges to integrated management
IWRM or the nexus approach do not have institutional blueprints, and it is up to each country to shape
it. In Nepal, IWRM has so far failed to gain enough momentum because of a power imbalance across
ministries, despite its use as a guiding principle in water policy documents since 2005 (Suhardiman,
Clement, and Bharati 2015). The most recent policy document that could shape IWRM in Nepal is the
Water Resource Policy approved in December 2020, led by WECS. The federal and provincial governments have major responsibilities when it comes to integrated water management; however, the role
the local governments will play to facilitate its operationalization, or basin-scale planning, is unclear.
In practice, the requirement for greater coordination and conflict resolution is likely to be one of the
biggest hurdles. Institutional and regulatory arrangements must be put in place for planning and implementation across administrative jurisdictions, ensuring economies of scale and scope and sharing of
benefits.
The power imbalance among ministries could undermine integrated water management efforts in the
absence of strategic interventions. Multiple ministries have sought to create basin-level authorities,
although the most recent draft of the Water Act 2020 does not have provisions for the creation of any
basin-level institution.6 There are four river basin management offices in the major basins that focus
on environmental conservation but their jurisdictions do not extend to water use or allocation. This
suggests that bringing together all stakeholders, despite the approval of the National Water Resource
Policy (GoN 2018a), will take significant efforts.
Although a major concern is that the federal tier may retain complete authority over water resources,
compromising local governments’ ability for service delivery, integrated water resources management invariably needs some level of central planning and coordination at the basin scale. Unless
basin-level planning is supported by the upcoming Water Act, the question of how the GoN plans
to o
­ perationalize integrated management of water resources remains to be resolved. River basin
­organizations could provide a good base in the short term for integrated planning in the sector. It is
important to note that without incorporating the participation of provincial and local governments
into basin ­planning, IWRM risks turning into the top-down but unintegrated process that federalization seeks to restructure, with serious implications for inclusion. When established, the rest of
the government bodies involved must confer on the legitimacy of the new basin organizations or
authorities, which will depend on coordination efforts to bring together local and provincial governments into the ­decision-making process. Without the representation of local and provincial voices
in the basin units, the local governments will be rather powerless to use water resources to fulfill
their mandates.
Moreover, operationalizing river basin planning through the various tiers of government in the new
federal setup is a tremendous challenge for Nepal, because each basin has numerous municipalities
(palikas) and is spread across provinces. For instance, 151 palikas share the Kosi basin alone. But
without it, the business-as-usual development of water resources is at best suboptimal and at worst

22   GLACIERS, RIVERS, AND SPRINGS: A WATER SECTOR DIAGNOSTIC OF NEPAL

detrimental to sustainable development. WRM is not sufficiently coordinated. Licenses for hydropower, irrigation, and drinking water schemes are doled out without adequate planning and coordination. The project selection process for these licenses has remained opaque. Optimal water project
planning and selection must consider the order and scale of projects catering to multiple water uses
(upstream versus downstream). The River Basin Plans prepared by WECS and the 2019 Irrigation
Master Plan, among others, recognize this need for coordination based on IWRM principles. The
implementation of the plans, however, requires substantial effort from all stakeholders.
Integrated water management has been successfully tested on a smaller scale at the local level in rural
areas through water use master plans (Water Resources Management Programme 2012). However,
scaling up has been a challenge and will need considerable work across all levels of governance. There
is an institutional and policy vacuum that needs to be filled to enable planning, service provision,
benefit sharing, and arbitration across horizontal and vertical tiers of government. Large knowledge
gaps exist regarding optimal development planning at the basin or subbasin levels and how these
would affect the upstream and downstream municipalities. Moreover, integrated water management
requires the GoN to identify and agree on a clear, evidence-based, and widely accepted rationale for
prioritizing water use across water users.

Challenge 3: Irrigation for Greater Agricultural Productivity and
Food Security
Because agriculture constitutes one-third of Nepal’s GDP and a substantial share of the population
depends on it for their livelihoods, irrigation development—its rehabilitation, revitalization, modernization, expansion, and management—is important for fostering agricultural productivity and
economic growth. Irrigation is the single-largest source of water demand in Nepal, as is the case
for primarily agrarian economies (World Bank 2019d). As it represents more than 80 percent of
water demand, managing irrigation systems is integral to water resource management. Despite its
vast water resources, Nepal’s rugged terrain limits the share of arable land, which is estimated to be
3.6 million hectares (ha) (GoN and ADB 2019)—about 24 percent of Nepal’s total land area. Of the
total arable land, about 2.3 million ha is irrigable, which is about 64 percent of the total arable land
and just 15 percent of the country. However, only about 1.1 million ha (48 percent of net irrigable
land) is currently irrigated, of which 0.7 million (32 percent of net irrigable land) is under managed irrigation—farmer-managed irrigation systems (FMISs), agency-managed irrigation systems
(AMISs), and joint-managed irrigation systems (JMISs). The shares of these break down to about
49 percent JMISs/AMISs and 51 percent FMISs (GoN and ADB 2019). Roughly 39 percent of the
existing irrigated land has access to irrigation water around the year (GoN and ADB 2019; Pradhan
and Belbase 2018).
Of the total irrigated land area, 59 percent uses surface water irrigation, 22 percent uses groundwater
irrigation, and 19 percent uses both surface and ground water (GoN and ADB 2019). The Terai has
the highest proportion of irrigable lands (65 percent), followed by hills (28 percent) and mountains
(7 percent) (GoN and ADB 2019). There is considerable scope for the expansion of irrigation services

What Are the Challenges?    23

in terms of both area and seasons. The lack of year-round irrigation, particularly in the Terai, is one
of two binding constraints to productivity growth in the sector (Cosic, Dahal, and Kitzmuller 2017).
The 2019 Irrigation Master Plan (IMP) aims to improve performance across 1.45 million ha of existing irrigated land and 1.18 million ha of new irrigated land over the next 25 years. Building capacity
across the three tiers of government for managing irrigation systems that follow IWRM principles is
an important focus area that the IMP highlights (GoN and ADB 2019).

Productivity growth in the Terai
Agricultural productivity in Nepal has remained nearly stagnant since the 2000s (Cosic, Dahal, and
Kitzmuller 2017). However, evaluation of smaller-scale groundwater irrigation interventions in the
Terai shows considerable returns on investment. Households that used shallow tubewell irrigation
earned three times more in net income because of higher yields and had a 26 percent greater cropping intensity than households that depended on rainfed agriculture (ADB 2012). Another study on
the sources of growth in agriculture in Nepal showed that the highest return on investment in the
Terai is for irrigation (World Bank 2016). Annual groundwater extraction for irrigation, domestic,
and industrial use is estimated to be 1.9 BCM, whereas the total groundwater recharge is about 8.8
BCM, which indicates that there is significant room to expand groundwater use for irrigation (Nepal
et al. 2021). Moreover, the means to extract groundwater are equally important, as reliable electricity
distribution remains a challenge especially in rural areas. Exploring viable opportunities for productivity growth through better irrigation facilities will be important in Nepal’s development efforts,
particularly in the rural areas.

Subsistence farming and poverty
The centrality of agriculture to the labor force makes irrigation modernization and expansion essential to a strong poverty reduction strategy, along with complementary agriculture and environment
interventions. Agriculture employs the largest share of Nepal’s formal labor force (21 percent) and up
to two-thirds of its combined formal and informal labor force (including subsistence agriculture).7 It
is crucial for household food security, more so in places where import markets for food are not well
developed. The estimated incidence of poverty in irrigated areas is half that in rainfed areas, adding
to the evidence base on irrigation’s role in mitigating poverty (ADB 2005), although the strategies
must differ by geographic region. Rainfall shocks—both dry and wet—affecting agricultural output
are shown to reduce weight-for-height in children under the age of five (Tiwari, Jacoby, and Skoufias
2013), which research has shown to be a powerful predictor of low levels of educational attainment
and earnings in the future. A study of food insecurity in the Terai, midmountain, and trans-Himalayan
regions of the Kaligandaki basin showed that irrigation is a primary determinant of food security in
all three ecological zones (Pandey and Bardsley 2019). It showed that more than one-third of the
households had experienced food insecurity, and although the Terai region has the potential for
alleviating this through a reliance on food markets, the remaining two ecological zones where food
insecurity was greater have limitations because of the inaccessibility of markets or prohibitively high
transport costs. In these regions, focusing on increasing local productivity through smaller-scale interventions in agricultural mechanization and irrigation, forestry, and watershed conservation remains

24   GLACIERS, RIVERS, AND SPRINGS: A WATER SECTOR DIAGNOSTIC OF NEPAL

the most sustainable solution. Forest and watershed conservation are indispensable for sustained
water availability for irrigation, especially in the mountain regions. The relationship can go both ways;
dry shocks and lack of irrigation can also lead to further deforestation and encroachment of wetlands
(Damania et al. 2017).
Irrigation interventions targeted toward small-holder farmers and rural communities must consider the changes in the socioeconomic structures that are afoot. Traditional farming-based communities are changing because of the increased labor migration of mostly young men. This mass
outward migration has had significant implications for FMISs, which make up about 70 percent
of the total surface water irrigation systems in Nepal. Lower participation in FMISs has been
associated with poorer management and rehabilitation. Traditionally, FMISs have outperformed
centrally managed systems in terms of agricultural productivity, water distribution, fee collection rates, and overall system maintenance. However, FMISs and WUSCs that manage irrigation
facilities need considerable institutional revamping in the wake of socioeconomic changes and
federalization, because most rural households still rely on agriculture for food security (Pradhan
and Belbase 2018).

Year-round irrigation
Investment in irrigation also stands to help Nepal achieve greater national food security through
an increased capacity to buffer against dry shocks and other exogenous shocks such as pandemics
that disrupt global supply chains. Nepal imports key crops such as rice and maize to meet domestic demand due to insufficient production. The sector has been further threatened by extreme
weather events and restricted by weak irrigation infrastructure, among other drawbacks. The low
prevalence of year-round irrigation indicates a low adaptive capacity of the sector to respond to
climatic variations. Changing precipitation patterns, such as delayed onset of the monsoon season,
are becoming more frequent and have further affected agricultural output in the country (Bharati
et al. 2014). Farmers have reported delayed onset of the monsoon, fewer rainy days, but more
intense rainfall over shorter periods. The winter droughts of 2008–09 in Nepal caused a significant drop in barley and wheat yields, putting nearly 2 million people in danger of food insecurity
(Bharati et al. 2014). Direct losses resulting from climate change in agriculture are equivalent to
about 0.8 percent per year of current GDP, and there will be a US$2.4 billion adaptation deficit by
2030 in three sectors, including agriculture (GoN et al. 2014). The losses are more severe in years
of extreme rainfall variability and are expected to hit poor and vulnerable households the hardest,
which is why irrigation, as part of greater water resource management, is integral to food security
and poverty reduction strategies.
In the Agriculture Development Strategy 2015–2035 and the Irrigation Master Plan 2018, the GoN
has included year-round irrigation as a part of its growth plan, along with improvements in crop
fertilization and pest management. Improved water and irrigation management has the potential to
save costs, increase productivity, and reduce water demand. However, for the protection of water
quality, this approach should be coordinated with regulation of the use of pesticides and fertilizers,
which usually follows the intensification of crop cultivation enabled by irrigation expansion (World
Bank 2019a).

What Are the Challenges?    25

Challenge 4: Building Resilience—Dealing with Climate Variability
and Change
The impacts of climate change are manifested primarily through water or the lack thereof. Whereas
challenge 3 touched on the climate’s role in agriculture, this section discusses projected climate risks
and the need for a coherent climate strategy within water resource management in Nepal, focusing on
adaptation and “no regret” investments.
Since the formulation of the Climate Change Policy in 2011, Nepal has made significant progress in
mainstreaming climate change adaptation plans into sectoral plans and projects. The revised Climate
Change Policy of 2019 has strategies and working policies for watershed conservation; water resources,
energy, agriculture, and food security; WSS services; and disaster risk reduction and management
(MoFE 2019). The National Water Policy 2020 and the National Policy for Disaster Risk Reduction
(MoHA 2018) also address climate-change-related challenges. Coherent implementation of these policies calls for strong coordination between the Ministry of Forest and Environment, which oversees
climate change policies and budgets, and other relevant ministries such as the Ministry of Energy, Water
Resources and Irrigation (MoEWRI). However, the climate policies do not yet have a supporting legal
provision to guide and enforce sectoral implementation. At this stage of development, there are two
crucial aspects to building climate resilience in Nepal.
First, Nepal has yet to build resilience against normal annual climate variability. Managing water resources
to smooth out fluctuations in water availability throughout the year is an imperative for reliable water
supply for human and economic needs. Evidence from regional studies has shown that sustained water
shortages affect labor incomes, employment levels, and firm revenue (Damania et al. 2017; Desbureaux
and Rodella 2019). This water insecurity is manifested in Nepal’s energy insecurity and food insecurity.
Second, Nepal needs to continue its focus on resilience against water-induced disasters that are predicted to become more frequent with climate change. In each of these types of resilience building, there
are short-, medium-, and long-term efforts necessary to minimize social and economic losses. Without
adequate adaptation measures, Nepal could face between 2 to 3 percent of GDP in average annual economic losses by 2050 across the three sectors (agriculture, hydropower, and disaster; GoN et al. 2014).
The following subsections explore how water resources fluctuate with normal climate variability,
changing weather patterns from climate change, and climate extremes.

Climate variability: The norm
Normal space and time variations of water availability are high in Nepal. This implies higher costs and
complexity for water infrastructure development. As discussed earlier, both water supply and agriculture suffer from inadequate year-round water availability. A cursory glance into Nepal’s geography
explains its climate variability. Situated at the precipice of the Himalayas, Nepal’s climate swings from
subtropical to alpine within a short breadth of about 180 kilometers. The dominating climatic feature,
the monsoon, brings dramatic fluctuations in water levels throughout the year (map 3.3). The average
annual precipitation is about 1,500 millimeters (mm), 80 percent of which occurs during the monsoon.

26   GLACIERS, RIVERS, AND SPRINGS: A WATER SECTOR DIAGNOSTIC OF NEPAL

MAP 3.3 Annual and Spatial Distribution of Mean Precipitation, by Season, 1981–2000

Source: World Bank Cartography Unit using Karki et al. (2017).
Note: Legend scale adjusted to map.

In addition to temporal variation, the spatial variation ranges from about 250 mm per year in the northwest to 5,000 mm in the mideast (Shrestha and Aryal 2011).
Without the necessary infrastructure for buffer, this normal climate variation is directly passed on to
every subsector with significant economic consequences. In hydropower, because most of the generation fleet is run-of-river type of plants, winter brings severe domestic electricity shortages, and a
greater need for imports. In agriculture, it means the loss of productivity for winter crops and seasonal
migration of labor. In WSS, it means fewer hours of water supply and taps that run dry. Adequate,
sustainable multipurpose storage is an imperative for greater productivity and human development.
Without it, the economy will continue to fluctuate with the vagaries of the climate. An analysis that
assessed the direct economic costs of climate variability in Nepal for agriculture and hydroelectricity
found high economic costs estimated at 1.5 to 2 percent of the 2013 GDP equivalent in an average year
(approximately US$270–360 million/year in 2013 prices) and as high as 5 percent in extreme years (GoN
et al. 2014). Indirect and macroeconomic costs are estimated to be 25 to 100 percent higher than direct
costs (GoN et al. 2014).

Climate change: The new norm
The science of how climate change will affect water availability and precipitation patterns, which has
gained increasing clarity and certainty in recent years, is an unequivocal clarion call for action. Since
2019, two major studies (Bolch et al. 2019; Immerzeel, Lutz, and Andrade 2020) on precipitation and

What Are the Challenges?    27

glacial melting have shown consistent results with serious policy implications for Nepal and the entire
subcontinent. Decrease in snowfall, increased snowline elevations, and longer melt seasons are projected to cause a decline in glacier volumes by up to 90 percent by the turn of the century in the
business-as-usual scenario, reducing an important contributor to dry season flows (Bolch et al. 2019).
Effects of climate change are already palpable in the increased temperatures (Eriksson et al. 2009),
decreased winter season duration, increased frequency and length of droughts, and erratic rainfall patterns experienced in the country (Sharma and Dahal 2010). An analysis of precipitation data from 210
stations across Nepal between 1981 to 2012 shows a mixed pattern of increasing and decreasing trends
across all seasons (map 3.4; Karki et al. 2017). The study notes a significant increase in 12 percent of the
stations in the premonsoon season, mostly in the lowlands, but a significant decrease across all regions
in the postmonsoon period (Karki et al. 2017) Post-monsoon precipitation, though low in volume, is
vital for rain-fed winter crops. The study also finds high-intensity precipitation extremes, with a significant positive trend in the number of consecutive dry days and a significant negative trend in the total
number of wet days (Karki et al. 2017).
Spring water in the midhills is what makes life possible for about 80 percent of the 13 million Nepalis
who live there (CBS 2011; Sharma et al. 2016; Poudel and Duex 2017). Several studies have reported a
significant decline in winter flows and the drying up of 15 to 30 percent of midhill springs (Agarwal,
Agrawal, and Nema 2014; Negi and Joshi 2002; Poudel and Duex 2017; Sharma et al. 2016; Tambe et al.
2012). Moreover, climate impacts are projected to be more pronounced and varied at smaller scales
MAP 3.4 Significant Trends in Seasonal Precipitation Totals for (a) Pre Monsoon;
(b) Monsoon; (c) Post Monsoon; and (d) Winter Season by Field Trend (significance at 0.1)

Source: World Bank Cartography Unit using Karki et al. (2017).
Note: Legend scale adjusted to map.

28   GLACIERS, RIVERS, AND SPRINGS: A WATER SECTOR DIAGNOSTIC OF NEPAL

(seasonal and subbasin level) than at larger scales (annual and basin level)—which have significant
policy implications for the scale of planning. Combined with the pressures of greater demand, the variability will be more conspicuous. The International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis’s projections
show that in the business-as-usual scenario, water availability in all regions is projected to decrease by
2030 and decrease further by 2050, meaning that water stress will continue to rise.8

Climate disasters: The extremes
Water-related disasters have punctuated Nepal’s development through setbacks to livelihoods and the
economy. Floods, landslides, and droughts have ravaged many regions over the years, and these events
are predicted to become increasingly extreme.
Flooding and landslides are the most frequent disasters in Nepal. Between 1971 and 2011, floods have
affected 3.9 million people and caused economic losses of about US$5.8 billion (Bhandari et al. 2018).
In 2017 alone, severe flooding caused an estimated US$585 million in damages (Bhandari et al. 2018).
Based on downscaled projections, there will be an expected 15 to 40 percent increase in projected
annual maximum river discharge and an expected 30 to 40 percent increase in river discharge for
1-in-10-year flood events by 2030, compared to a 1995 baseline (World Bank 2019f, using Lutz et al.
2016; Wijngaard et al. 2017). As of 2019, about 1.47 million people are exposed to 1-in-10-year floods,
assuming no flood protection, and this number is projected to rise to about 1.95 million by 2030 in
the low-­emission scenario (RCP 4.5) (World Bank 2019f ). Intense rainfall events also lead to flash
flooding in areas with insufficient drainage and landslides in high-slope areas with weak soil or poor
vegetation. There is significant population and infrastructure exposure to landslides throughout the
midhills (map 3.5; see appendix D for details on climate models). A study comparing the variations in
rainfall-triggered landslides and earthquake-induced landslides found that rain-fall triggered landslides
are more than twice as likely to occur within 100 meters of roads, with strong policy implications for
both road development and drainage management for reducing disaster risks of landslides (McAdoo
et al. 2018). Nepal also has a high risk for glacial lake outburst floods. Such floods can occur when avalanches or rockfalls enter high-altitude lakes, causing the lakes to overflow. An estimated 11 lakes are
at high risk and 31 lakes at very high risk of outburst flooding (Rounce, Watson, and McKinney 2017).
Droughts, though less common than floods, have an outsized effect in many regions, worsening
household food insecurity. Estimates of late monsoon onset derived from Lutz et al. (2016) show
that although the average date of onset is likely to stay constant, its variability is expected to increase.9
About 11.6 million people in the Terai region face more than 60 consecutive dry days per year, which is
projected to increase even in the moderate climate change scenario (map 3.6).

Integrated approach to risk management
Building resilience requires preventive measures through proper WRM, including through conservation
and adequate infrastructure such as sustainable storage and embankments, as well as the building of
strong hydrological and meteorological (hydromet) and early-warning systems (EWSs). Although the
country needs to invest and prepare on all these fronts simultaneously, managing water resources forms
a strong basis for disaster risk reduction. Therefore, an integrated approach to disaster risk management

What Are the Challenges?    29

MAP 3.5 Population Exposure to Landslides
High exposure

Severe exposure

Landslide susceptibility
Landslide susceptibility
Slight
Low
Moderate
High
Severe

Exposed population
<5,000
5,000–10,000
10,000–20,000
20,000–40,000
40,000–80,000
>80,000

Source: World Bank Cartography Unit using World Bank (2019f).

(DRM) can help build a cascade of preventive measures, which starts with watershed management,
among many measures, and extends through strong EWSs and disaster response systems.
The first step in risk mitigation calls for water resource and wetland management. Wetlands make up 5
percent of Nepal’s area (MoFE 2018). They regulate groundwater recharge and water quality and prevent inundation, erosion, and sediment transport. They are effective carbon sinks and are classified as
the most productive type of ecosystem. Wetlands remain the main source of livelihood for 85 percent
of agrarian communities, which rely on them for food and fodder, and 10 percent of the rural ethnic
communities. One study estimated the economic valuation of Phewa Lake of Pokhara, Koshi Tappu,
and Jagadishpur Reservoir at US$43 million, US$16 million, and US$1 million, respectively (MoFE 2018).
Though the GoN does not systematically value the benefits and services provided by wetlands, a comprehensive economic valuation of wetlands and their contribution to GDP can help in transitioning
towards integrated water resource management. The challenge lies in effective coordination among the
Ministry of Forests and Environment (MoFE, formerly the Ministry of Forests and Soil Conservation),
which holds the mandate for their conservation, and the Ministry of Agriculture, Land Management and
Cooperatives and MoEWRI, whose actions depend on and affect them.
In addition to integrated forest and watershed conservation, water infrastructure, particularly for
multipurpose storage and flood protection, is crucial for managing temporal and spatial variability
and building resilience. The World Bank and International Water Management Institute’s joint 2017
report considers the stress to be severe at the subcontinent level, citing the highly variable monsoon,
low storage capacity, rapid urbanization, anthropogenic pollution, drying wetlands, and unmanaged

30   GLACIERS, RIVERS, AND SPRINGS: A WATER SECTOR DIAGNOSTIC OF NEPAL

MAP 3.6 Projected Change in Consecutive Dry Days, 2016–45 versus 1981–2010 Baseline
RCP 4.5 (2016–45)

RCP 8.5 (2016–45)

Baseline (1981-2010)

Consecutive dry days
<40
40–45
45–50
50–55
55–60
60–65
>65

Change in consecutive
dry days
>6-day decrease
2–6
No change
2–6
>6-day increase

Source: World Bank Cartography Unit using World Bank (2019f).
Note: Projected change is measured as the maximum number of consecutive days per year with less than 1 millimeter of rainfall.
Future scenarios are ensemble medians of four models for each of two scenarios (RCP 4.5: stabilization scenario and RCP 8.5:
business-as-usual scenario). The Representative Concentration Pathway (RCP) is a greenhouse gas concentration trajectory
adopted by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change.

groundwater abstraction, disputes, and conflicts (Hirji, Nicol, and Davis 2017). Nepal’s storage volume
requirement to satisfy annual average seasonal water demand is 29.86 cubic kilometers, of which it has
none so far. In comparison, Bangladesh covers 33 percent of its storage needs and India covers up to
76 percent (ICIMOD 2009; table 3.1). Environmentally sustainable storage is a key strategy for climate
change adaptation (Bolch et al. 2019; ICIMOD 2009; Vaidya 2015). For hydroelectricity alone, the Japan
International Cooperation Agency’s (JICA’s) nationwide master plan on storage-type hydroelectric
power development showed that by 2032, Nepal will need at least 1,993 megawatts of storage capacity
in the business-as-usual power-demand scenario; 3,154 megawatts for the high-demand scenario; and
1,664 megawatts for the low-demand scenario. The plan identifies various sites after evaluation of social
and environmental considerations (JICA 2014). As this study recommends, the projects are more likely
to be successful if developed in coordination with irrigation and environmental conservation such that
their economies of scope and scale can be achieved.
Nepal also faces the challenge of strengthening its hydromet and EWSs. The ongoing Building Resilience
to Climate Related Hazards Project for Nepal,10 led by the Department of Hydrology and Meteorology,
began the modernization of forecasting technology. The project aims to bring accuracy and availability
of monitoring data and real-time collection to replace an older system based on manual measurements
(World Bank 2012). Going forward, federalization gives Nepal an opportunity to build resilience from

What Are the Challenges?    31

TABLE 3.1 Gap between Storage Capacity and Storage Needs, by Country, 2006
Country

Seasonal storage index
(km3)

Current storage
(% of seasonal storage index)

Bangladesh

62.28

33

Bhutan

0.40

0

India

356.60

76

Nepal

29.86

0

Source: ICIMOD 2009.
Note: The seasonal storage index indicates the volume of storage needed to satisfy annual water demand based on the average
seasonal rainfall cycle. The Brown and Lall (2006) study identified 23 of 163 countries as having a positive storage requirement,
that is, a need to reduce the effect of rainfall variability on food and livelihoods by transferring water availability from wet to dry
months.

the ground up with more monitoring stations at higher spatial and temporal resolutions that can be
maintained by local governments with more effective EWSs (Brown et al. 2019).
In summary, managing climate-related water variation and extremes is indispensable for Nepal’s
growth. As discussed, human development and growth in all sectors hinge on climate adaption to
ensure enough water in the dry seasons to drink, irrigate, and run businesses, industries, and hydropower plants. Similarly, they hinge on Nepal’s effort to ensure resilience so that its people and economy
are not trapped by preventable setbacks. Finally, as a country at the headwaters of a basin that sustains
more than 0.5 billion people across the region, Nepal’s foresight today on climate-related water management is likely to bear a fruitful legacy, potentially even beyond its borders.

Challenge 5: Transboundary Management
Adequate transboundary cooperation is an important part of WRM in the region. The Ganges basin
that encompasses Nepal stretches up to China and across to India and Bangladesh. The headwaters
flow downstream to sustain more than 400 million people in the Ganges plain, in addition to 28 million in Nepal. Cooperation and treaties between India and Nepal pertaining to water resources date
back to the Exchange of Letters of 1920 with the then-British government in India regarding the Sarada
Barrage project in the Mahakali River planned for irrigation facilities in the adjacent states (Upreti
2006). Since then, four other agreements (table 3.2) have been signed between the two riparian nations
that have been politically contentious and inadequate in achieving the goals of either country. Both
countries have expressed grievances regarding the management of transboundary issues. Based on
the treaties, they have relied on structural embankments, but flood preparedness and EWSs are not
in place, communication is poor, and infrastructure has been neglected by both for decades (Gokarn
and Sajjanhar 2014). Physical structures for larger rivers have been breached regularly. When the Koshi
flood broke through an embankment in 2008, it washed away the livelihoods of more than 70,000
people in the Terai and more than 3.5 million people in India (Dixit et al. 2009). Grievances on the
Nepal side regarding other treaties relate to a smaller actual command area compared with the agreed
area; a barrage location changed to the border area, making upstream territories in Nepal more prone
to flooding; one-third of the agricultural command area being inundated during the monsoon because

32   GLACIERS, RIVERS, AND SPRINGS: A WATER SECTOR DIAGNOSTIC OF NEPAL

of poorly located embankments; irregular water release conducted without prior consultation; deficient
and poorly maintained cross-drainage; unequal water allocations (Mahakali); and stalled joint reservoir
projects (Gokarn and Sajjanhar 2014; table 3.2).
Dialogue between the stakeholder countries on these issues have been limited so far. The South Asia
Water Initiative (SAWI) rekindled consultations for greater regional cooperation on the issue of glacier
melting. It also facilitated technical work on flood forecasting in Bihar, drawing on an existing memorandum of understanding between Nepal and India to facilitate rainfall-related data sharing (World
Bank 2019c). SAWI has admittedly had limited success in directly advancing joint collaborative action
among riparian countries in the Ganges basin, highlighting the magnitude of this challenge. For optimal
benefits, water management calls for transboundary cooperation, such as basin-level planning, across
administrative boundaries. Designing infrastructure for optimal water management is also likely to be
more economically viable when all users and demands are considered. However, Nepal’s capacity for
transboundary assessments and cooperation is relatively low. The grievances based on the past treaties
indicate that Nepal needs to develop a significant knowledge base and planning capacity to successfully
engage in bilateral and/or trilateral cooperation.

TABLE 3.2 Summary of Treaties, India and Nepal, 1920–96
Project

Intended
design

Allocation
constraints

River

Date

Mahakali

1920

Sarada
Barrage

Irrigation for
India

Permanent exchange of riverine land;
water allocation to Nepal low and
conditional on availability (Upreti
2006)

Concerns or complaints

Koshi

1954,
revised
1966

Koshi Barrage Irrigation,
flood control,
and power

Smaller actual command area
compared with agreement (10,000
versus 66,000 hectares); barrage
siting changed to border area, making
upstream territories in Nepal more
prone to flooding (Dixit et al. 2009)

Gandak

1959,
revised
1964

✓
Gandak
Irrigation,
Barrage,
flood control,
Irrigation, and and power
Power Project

Water released irregularly and
without prior consultation, despite
repeated farmer requests to the
barrage operators in India; deficient
and poorly maintained cross-drainage
works in the two canals; flash floods
and longer inundations (Dixit and
Shukla 2017), with one-third of the
command area inundated during the
monsoon because of infrastructure

Mahakali

1991,
revised
1992

Tanakpur
Barrage

✓

Unequal water allocations; electricity
pricing (Upreti 2006, Gyawali and
Dixit 1999; Gokarn and Sajjanhar
2014; Bagale and Adhikari 2020)

Mahakali

1996

Proposed
Pancheshwor
Multipurpose
Dam

✓

Stalled (Gokarn and Sajjanhar 2014;
Bagale and Adhikari 2020)

Source: Adapted from Shrestha and Silwal (2017), comparing the designed benefits versus actual benefits derived from the
treaties.

What Are the Challenges?    33

Notes
1. Based on data from the Landsat-derived Global Human Settlement Layer.
2. Based on Multiple Indicator Cluster Surveys (MICSs) 2014 and 2019 (CBS 2015, 2020).
3. The local election before the 2017 election was held in 1997.
4. Based on World Bank calculations using National Planning Commission data; Cosic, Dahal, and Kitzmuller
2017.
5. In addition to the DPC, the following study, among many, provides useful lessons (Ogino, Dash, and Nakayama
2019, 14): “The foregoing analysis also suggests a number of policies to be applied for optimal hydropower
development designs and schemes. In this regard, project planners, including policy makers, developers and
financers, should pay attention to the following practical points: (i) selection of project sites to value the head
for generation for the purpose of project cost reduction per unit of installed generation capacity; (ii) adequate
contingency plans for cost overruns and implementation challenges in exploiting large water discharges;
(iii) cost-efficient design of compact project facilities with fewer risks in social and environmental impacts
and project implementation in order to attract funding resources, including any additional carbon emissions
related funds; (iv) work-contractual and financial arrangements to reduce substantial burdens of project management and funding costs during construction through risk-sharing mechanisms; and (v) careful scoring
between benefits and risks arising from the purposes and uses of hydropower projects (e.g., run-of-the-river or
reservoir types; power export or domestic consumption; and power generation, irrigation, or multipurpose).”
6. Four other government departments—the Nepal Planning Commission, the Department of Water Induced
and Disaster Prevention and the Groundwater Resources Development Board (both under the MoEWRI), and
the Department of Soil Conservation and Watershed Management (under the MoFE)—in addition to WECS,
have proposed establishing river basin authorities to preside over basin planning, as mentioned in their draft
policies and acts such as the Watershed Policy and River Law of the MoFE.
7. According to the 2008 Labor Force Survey (LFS), two-thirds of the employment share was in agriculture.
The 2018 LFS changed the definition of the labor force to exclude subsistence agriculture (CBS 2008, 2019).
8. In the high-growth scenario, total water demand is projected to double by 2050 compared with the present-day demand in many parts of Nepal, driven by domestic and industrial demand. All districts in the Terai
show a water stress index above one (denoting conditions under which the water demand surpasses the
available surface water resources).
9. From a standard deviation of ±13 days for 1981–2010 to ±20 days in 2030.
10. In 2013, the World Bank provided approximately US$31 million to Nepal to assist the country’s effort in building resilience to climate-related hazards.

4
Where Do We Go?
The preceding discussion highlighted key points that must be considered when scoping out viable
opportunities for development investments in Nepal. They include: a fledgling federalized system
of governance, high climate variability and vulnerability, rapid and unplanned urbanization, large
fiscal gaps, and low state capacity as reflected in a poor track record of large public investment
projects.
Strengthening governance capacity, particularly at the local level, is a first step needed to set in
motion changes in the political economy that will enable the necessary infrastructure investments for
­ensuring safe and reliable water for all users and uses across human, economic, and environmental
needs. Considering the context and challenges, six priority areas emerge as important guides for Nepal’s
water resources development in this decade. The following paragraphs discuss these areas and outline
their alignment with the World Bank Country Partnership Framework (CPF) objectives. Furthermore,
table 4.1 details the key processes that are expected to change with the successful operationalization of
these priorities, and also lists the SDG targets with which they are aligned.

Strengthen State Capacity and Institutions
First, building state capability for strong governance deserves immediate and sustained policy attention
and a multisectoral effort, especially involving agriculture, energy, disaster risk management (DRM),

35

36   GLACIERS, RIVERS, AND SPRINGS: A WATER SECTOR DIAGNOSTIC OF NEPAL

and the environment. While significant resources have already been dedicated to this end, progress
remains slow. Budget execution rates have been low, indicating the need for substantial improvement
in implementation capacity. Taking guidance from the lessons learned from past capacity building
initiatives and the Federalism Capacity Needs Assessment (FCNA) report (World Bank 2019a), Nepal
can improve its strategy to build capacity at all three tiers of governance. This plan should recognize
that local governments primarily need to build capabilities for managing the demands of all users and
user committees inclusively, operate and maintain service structures, build integrated water resource
management planning capacity, establish environmental and social safeguards, and develop a system of
financial procurement and management. The integrated management approach, which is well aligned
with the Water Resource Policy 2020, the Irrigation Master Plan 2019, and the Watershed Management
Strategy of the National Forest Policy 2019, merits significant support. However, the participation of the
local and provincial tiers is indispensable for fostering cooperation and ­efficient water management
among competing uses across newly formed boundaries.

Aligned to CPF objectives:

• Objective 1.1. Improved budget and revenue management
• Objective 1.2. Strengthened institutions for public sector management and service delivery

Maintain Reliable Water Supply and Sanitation Services for Basic
and Economic Needs
Second, the need of the hour is to have enough water for human and economic needs. Dealing with
water insecurity is a high priority for Nepal. This means that water supply requirements need to be
accounted for in upstream water resources management. Water shortages and poor sanitation have
enormous economic, environmental, and social costs for broad segments of Nepal’s population,
and primarily the poor, vulnerable, and marginalized people. These costs are likely to be amplified
by a crisis like COVID-19, especially in the major urban centers, which have some of the worst water
supply infrastructure despite being the country’s growth engines. The importance of ramping up
investments in safe water and sanitation, including wastewater treatment, stands out in the context of
this pandemic, with a renewed focus on closing inequalities in access to basic services.
Water supply and sanitation (WSS) are among the services that the newly formed local governments
must be supported in managing. Although development partners like the Asian Development Bank
are working in small towns and in the capital city, there is much to be done across the country, especially in secondary cites. Kathmandu’s pace of growth shows greater need than what is in the pipeline
so far. WSS projects are an opportunity to engage in strengthening the service-delivery mechanisms
of nascent local governments. The GoN needs to rationalize the roles and r­ esponsibilities of federal ministries and local governments in planning and implementing services, and put accountability systems in place. Furthermore, the country needs to regularize budgeting and reliable fund
flow mechanisms from the federal to the local government levels. Implementing accurate data and

Where Do We Go?    37

information systems to track inputs, outputs, and outcomes at the local level—with disaggregated
data to track progress across time, regions, g­ enders and ­disadvantaged groups of people—(through
the new N-WASH system) is an imperative for c­ ontinued inclusive development of the sector.
Considering the existing financial gaps in improving basic service delivery and its urgency for the country, budget allocation and use across the water subsectors need to minimize efficiency gaps. Nepal also
needs to prioritize multipurpose storage projects that extend to water supply. This is one of the areas
in which private sector participation1 can be tested once adequate institutional prerequisites, such as a
politically independent pricing regulator, are established.

Aligned to CPF objectives:

• Objective 1.2. Strengthened institutions for public sector management and service delivery
• Objective 3.2. Improved access to services and support for the well-being of vulnerable groups

Smooth Out the Effects of Climate Variability for Water Security
and Resilience
Third, as a sector that is highly vulnerable to climate change and disaster risks, investments toward
resilience should continue, not only in crisis response but also upstream water management. With
the ongoing development policy credit with catastrophe deferred drawdown, Nepal is taking a proactive stance toward improving its institutional and regulatory framework, integrating climate resilience in key sectors, and enhancing crisis preparedness. Although this approach begins to tackle
the problem of climate extremes, Nepal still needs investments at the upstream management level
that will shield economic activities from normal annual water variability. It should also include
­forest and wetland management—aligned with the National Forest Policy 2019, Wetland Policy 2012,
and National Ramsar Strategy and Action Plan 2018­–24—as part of an integrated approach to resilience and risk reduction, especially because they form the basis of the livelihoods of vulnerable
communities.
The evidence overwhelmingly points to the need for buffer mechanisms for the dry season. Sustainable
multipurpose storage and transfer schemes will be an important step toward this need for all sectors.
Another step is to invest in further strengthening hydrological and meteorological (hydromet) information systems and the local capacity to use evidence from monitoring stations to influence programs
and policies. These steps will be crucial for climate resilience and, eventually, basin-level planning.

Aligned to CPF objectives:

• Objective 3.3. Increased resilience to health shocks, natural disasters, and climate change
• Objective 3.4. Improved adoption of sustainable natural resource management; increase in number
of farmers adopting climate smart agricultural practices in targeted districts or states

38   GLACIERS, RIVERS, AND SPRINGS: A WATER SECTOR DIAGNOSTIC OF NEPAL

Boost Agricultural Productivity to Promote Growth and Poverty
Reduction
Fourth, although the Terai is already home to most of Nepal’s irrigation investments, increasing yearround productivity and commercially viable farming in the region would be conducive to greater economic growth. There is a need to expand irrigation services with appropriate technologies to more
than 900,000 hectares of nonirrigated irrigable land, alongside other complementary investments in
agriculture. This approach would require modernization of irrigation facilities and also their adequate
operation and maintenance to ensure year-round services.
Despite a gradual structural change in the economy away from agriculture, a large proportion of the
poor remain reliant on small-holder farming. However, the farmer-managed irrigation systems that
small farms depend on are weakening due to these structural changes, driven by outward migration and urbanization. Therefore, to reach subsistence farmers, strengthening farmer-managed
irrigation systems with stronger support from the local governments is important. Moreover, for a
comprehensive solution, interventions should embed appropriate agricultural extension services
and forest and watershed conservation.

Aligned to CPF objectives:

• Objective 2.5. Improved income opportunities
• Objective 3.2. Improved access to services and support for the well-being of vulnerable groups
• Objective 3.3. Increased resilience to health shocks, natural disasters, and climate change

Develop Strong Regulatory Institutions to Enable Effective
Private Sector Investments
Given the massive investment needs and financing gap, private sector participation will have continued importance. However, Nepal needs to strengthen its governance and regulatory environment to enable reliable and effective private participation. The 2015 Constitution and the 14th
Periodic Plan prioritize private sector development for greater growth. The World Bank’s Nepal
Infrastructure Sector Assessment Program highlights several interventions that combine short- and
longer-term structural and policy changes that will relieve bottlenecks for infrastructure investments, including in water supply, sanitation, and waste management. These investments can contribute to the necessary water infrastructure for people and for firms to operate, grow, and maintain
competitiveness.
Drawing lessons from Nepal’s experience in public-private partnership (PPPs) in the hydropower
sector and water supply management, a politically independent regulator and strong contract
design are minimum requirements to prepare the government to enable reliable and efficient PPPs

Where Do We Go?    39

(Engel, Fischer, and Galetovic 2020). Although donors such as the US Agency for International
Development are assisting with PPP lawyers and transaction advisors for strong contract preparation, Nepal is lacking in its plan to strengthen the domestic governance structure required for the
lifetime of such projects. Independent, fair pricing and service quality regulation and enforcement
capacity are critical institutional elements that need early attention. Finally, it is an imperative for the
government to ensure that privately delivered services are inclusive and affordable.

Aligned to CPF objectives:

• Objective 2.4. Improved regulatory environment for competitiveness

Build Knowledge on Transboundary Collaboration for Resolving
Issues in Irrigation, Energy, and Flooding
Continued efforts to build transboundary cooperation are fundamental for greater basin-level planning and addressing riparian challenges; however, Nepal should first focus on building the necessary
knowledge base and capacity to be well informed in all matters relating to hydro-diplomacy. Key
topics include cooperation, benefit- and risk-sharing, international water law, water resource modeling and engineering, the best approach to determine allocation, among others. This knowledge
base—combined with a commitment to an evidence-based approached for pursuing transboundary
projects—is critical for creating a common ground where all the riparian countries have the same
technical perception of the problem at hand, and the ability to plan for Pareto-Admissible2 outcomes
at the basin scale (Rogers 1993).
Water sharing, irrigation, and disaster management all rely on trust and understanding among
the riparian countries in the basin. But first, these countries need to adopt basin-level planning
internally. In Nepal, these plans are still in their initial phases, as they are in India and Bangladesh.
Starting small in building knowledge on mutually beneficial collaborations like irrigation and hydropower may pave the path for more complex pursuits such as water sharing. Resolving these challenges based on sound evidence and cooperation can significantly improve lives and livelihoods in
the greater basin.
In summary, Nepal is still at the initial stages of development in which it needs to work toward providing enough water, year-round, for its people, its economy, and the environment while addressing
climate change. There is much left to be done in practically every subsector; however, it is strategic
to focus on the outlined priorities. These priorities indicate the need for collaboration with the agriculture, hydropower, environment, DRM, and governance sectors to ensure a coordinated approach
within the GoN, the World Bank, and beyond. Table 4.1 summarizes the priority policy areas, outlines
potential interventions, provides initial outputs that could be used as performance indicators, and lists
the relevant sub-sectors and aligned SDG targets.

40   GLACIERS, RIVERS, AND SPRINGS: A WATER SECTOR DIAGNOSTIC OF NEPAL

TABLE 4.1 Policy Areas, Interventions, and Potential Performance Indicators
Policy area

Reforms or investments

Performance indicators

Relevant sectors

Strengthened state
capacity to enable
basin-level planning
and improved
service delivery in a
federalized context
[SDG targets 6.5,
16.7, 17.9, 17.14]

• Build local government
mechanism and capacity for
basin-level planning
• Support WECS for basin-level
planning and incentivize local
government participation
• Rationalize mandates and
role overlaps
• Establish and enforce a
regulatory framework
• Invest in river basin modeling
and hydromet information
systems for evidence-based
policy making
• Create accountability
mechanisms

• River basin planning and
conflict resolution systems
built across horizontal and
vertical tiers of governance
• Clear mandates for each of
the subsectoral institutions
in the federal framework;
clarity across water-related
acts on issues such as
asset ownership, autonomy
of different stakeholders.
• Data systems set up for
risk calculations necessary
for disaster and climaterelated investments
• Adequate allocations for
O&M established in the
subsector budgets
• Established public
accountability systems

• Water

2

Reliable, inclusive
WSS services for
basic and economic
needs
[SDG targets 1.4,
6.1, 6.2, 6.3]

• Build local government
gender and social inclusion
capacity for service delivery
• Implement monitoring and
O&M
• Support water utilities and
expand piped water supply
and sewer systems in the
capital and in secondary
towns
• Build and ensure functionality
of wastewater plants

• Percentage of functional
• Water
water schemes in rural
• Urban
areas
• Governance
• Increased coverage,
• Social protection
continuity, and reliability
• Health
of municipal and urban
• Education
water supply (hours
per week)
• High household water
security and greater access
rates to safe WSS
• Improved utility finances
(NRW, O&M cost recovery)

3

Resilience against
climate variability
and change
[SDG targets 1.5,
2.4, 6.4, 6.6 13.2]

• Invest in river management
and watershed conservation
• Invest in sustainable disasterresilient infrastructure
• Invest in sustainable, feasible,
and socially responsible
multipurpose storage capacity
to reduce vulnerabilities
associated with climate
variability
• Invest in further
strengthening hydromet and
EWSs for adaptation and
resilience
• Create safety net against
climate shocks and
vulnerabilities

• Year-round water
availability for domestic
supply, irrigation, energy,
and ecosystem needs
• Functional flood control
infrastructure and
dedicated O&M funds
• Functional hydromet
stations and data
availability
• Functional EWSs
• Effective disaster response
and relief mechanisms
• Longer-term social
protection systems for
affected populations

1

• Governance
• Energy
• Agriculture
• Transport
• Environment
• Urban
• DRM

• Water
• Agriculture
• Energy
• Environment
• DRM
• Social protection
• Climate change

(continued)

Where Do We Go?    41

TABLE 4.1 (continued)
Performance indicators

Relevant sectors

4

Boost agricultural
productivity
[SDG targets 2.4,
6.4]

Policy area

• Expand irrigation services to • Percentage of agricultural
nonirrigated irrigable land,
land with year-round
prioritizing productivity and
irrigation
viability
• Agricultural productivity in
• Provide local government
the dry season
support for FMISs in tandem • Watershed management as
with agricultural interventions
part of FMISs
and watershed management
• Provide year-round irrigation
where feasible
• Modernize irrigation facilities
and ensure functionality

Reforms or investments

• Water
• Agriculture
• Environment
• Climate change

5

Governance and
regulation for
private sector
participation
[SDG targets 17.5,
17.17]

• Establish mechanism for
fair and transparent project
selection
• Establish mechanism for fair
and transparent procurement
of contractors
• Establish independent pricing
and service regulator
• Implement institution for
management for the lifetime
of the PPP
• Adopt fair arbitration
protocols

• Water
• Governance
• IFC
• MIGA
• Energy
• Legal

6

Build knowledge on
transboundary
cooperation
[SDG 6.5]

Build knowledge base required
• Reliable evidence base
to initiate bilateral and trilateral
and capacity built to help
cooperation for basin planning
establish transboundary
and climate resilience
cooperation
• Committed government
units for negotiations

• More private sector
financing
• Fewer cost overruns of
infrastructure projects
• Fewer time overruns
• Minimal need for
renegotiation
• Greater efficiency of
projects

• Riparian
authorities
• Governance
• Irrigation
• DRM
• Energy
• Water

Note: DRM = disaster risk management; EWSs = early-warning systems; FMISs = farmer-managed irrigation systems;
hydromet = hydrological and meteorological; IFC = International Finance Corporation; MIGA = Multilateral Investment Guarantee
Agency; NRW = nonrevenue water; O&M = operation and maintenance; PPP = public-private partnership; WECS = Water and
Energy Commission Secretariat; WSS = water supply and sanitation.

Notes
1.

2.

Inviting water vendors into PPPs in the urban WSS sector where they maintain minimum service delivery and
water quality standards has emerged as a policy option (Opryszko et al. 2009) and may be a viable short-term
solution while larger schemes are completed. Without proper standards and their enforcement, water supplied by informal markets may pose serious health risks, undermine equitable services, and carry the risk of
monopoly rents or high tariffs through collusions.
A plan/allocation is Pareto-Admissible when no other allocation can make either party better off.

Appendix A: Water-Related
Institutions
TABLE A.1 Government Ministries and Departments Responsible for Water-Related Issues
Ministry

Function

Ministry of Energy, Irrigation
Water Resources
development
and Irrigation

Power sector
development

Major water-related
departments or units

Scope

• WECS

• WRM, policy, and planning

•D
 epartment of Water
Resources and Irrigation

•C
 ountrywide surface and
ground irrigation

•D
 epartment of Hydrology and
Metrology

• Hydromet services—central

•G
 roundwater Resources
Development Board

•G
 roundwater research and
management—countrywide

•W
 ater Resource Research and
Development Center

• Water resources research

•D
 epartment of Electricity
Development

•H
 ydropower development,
policy, licensing

• WECS

• WRM, policy, and planning

•D
 epartment of Water
Resources and Irrigation

•C
 ountrywide surface and
groundwater irrigation

•W
 ater Resource Research and
Development Center

• Water resources research

•N
 epal Electricity Authority
(NEA)

•D
 evelopment and sales of
hydropower

•A
 lternative Energy Promotion
Center

• Microhydropower

•H
 ydroelectricity Investment and • Hydropower (mostly financing)
Development Company
• Vidyut Utpadan Company

• Hydropower development
(continued)
43

44   GLACIERS, RIVERS, AND SPRINGS: A WATER SECTOR DIAGNOSTIC OF NEPAL

TABLE A.1 (continued)
Ministry
Ministry of Water
Supply

Function

Major water-related
departments or units

Drinking water
•D
 epartment of Water Supply
supply and
and Sanitation Management
sewerage provision • R
 ural Water Supply Fund
Development Board

Ministry of
Agriculture, Land
Management and
Cooperatives

Crop production
and agricultural
development

Ministry of Forests
and Environment

Forest
management and
soil conservation

Ministry of Urban
Development

Water related
to urban
development

Ministry
of Science,
Technology, and
Environment

Innovation and
scientific research

Ministry of
Population and
Environment

Environmental
conservation and
pollution control

Ministry
of Physical
Infrastructure and
Transport

Development
of physical
infrastructure to
link rural areas

Scope
•C
 ountrywide, rural, and urban
WSS
• Countrywide and rural WSS

•N
 epal Water Supply
Corporation

• WSS for 23 towns

•K
 athmandu Valley Water
Supply Management Board
/Kathmandu Upatyaka
Khanepani Limited

• Kathmandu Valley WSS

•M
 elamchi Water Supply
Development Board

•M
 elamchi water transfer
investment program

•W
 ater users and sanitation
committees (WUSCs)

• Respective WSS

• Department of Agriculture

•D
 epartment of Urban
Development and Building
Construction

• Selected larger cities
• River basin management

•H
 igh Powered Committee for
Integrated Development of
Bagmati Civilization

• Wastewater

Ministry of Federal Development of
•M
 unicipalities and municipal
Affairs and Local
local infrastructure
boards
Development

•S
 elected large cities (Ilam,
Bharatpur, Hetauda, Kavre
Valley, Dharan Biratnagar,
Birganj, Butwal, and
Nepalgunj)

Note: hydromet = hydrological and meteorological; WECS = Water Energy Commission Secretariat; WRM = water resource
management; WSS = water supply and sanitation.

Appendix B: Development
Partner Engagement
TABLE B.1 Preliminary Mapping of Development Partner Engagement in the Water Sector
Subsector
Water supply
and
sanitation

Development
partners

Service delivery

Policy and institutional
strengthening

World Bank

• Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Limited
Improvement Program
• Nepal Urban Governance and
Infrastructure Project

ADB

•M
 elamchi Drinking Water
Limited, integral part of specific
Supply Project
projects but policy support being
conceptualized
•K
 athmandu Valley Wastewater
Management Project
•K
 athmandu Valley Water Supply
Improvement Project
•U
 rban Water Supply and
Sanitation Sector Project
•T
 hird Small Town Water Supply
and Sanitation Sector Project
•R
 egional Urban Development
Project
•F
 ecal Sludge Management pilots
in two towns (including publicprivate partnerships)
(continued)

45

46   GLACIERS, RIVERS, AND SPRINGS: A WATER SECTOR DIAGNOSTIC OF NEPAL

TABLE B.1 (continued)
Subsector

Development
partners

Service delivery

Policy and institutional
strengthening

UNICEF, WHO,
and UN-Habitat

•W
 ater and sanitation system
•W
 ater Safety Plan
•O
 DF status

Primarily focused on ODF status
and water safety plan

Government of
Finland

•R
 ural Village Water Resource
Management Project Phase
III (cofunded by the European
Union) Sustainable WASH for
All (SUSWA)
•H
 ariyo Tatha Baliyo Pashchim
(A Green and Strong West)
•C
 apacity Building in Arsenic
Mitigation in Nepal

Part of integrated local
development

JICA

•C
 apacity Development Project
for the Improvement of Water
Supply Management in SemiUrban Areas (WASMIP II)
•P
 roject for Improvement of
Water Supply in Pokhara
•D
 ata Collection Survey on
Water Supply and Waste
Water in Larger Cities
•M
 aster Plan Development of
Sewerage System in Pokhara
City
•S
 trengthening KUKL (TCP)
•M
 elamchi Drinking Water
Project (Consessional Loan)

Focused on WUSCs and NWSC

UK Department
for International
Development

•R
 ural Water & Sanitation
Program (Gurkha Welfare
Scheme) Phase V

Focused on Gurkha Welfare
Society

USAID

•S
 afa Pani Project

WUSCs

•S
 wachchhata (Health and
Hygiene Activity)
•S
 uaahara II (Integrated Nutrition
Activity)
•W
 ASHFin
•W
 ASHPAL-Action Research on
MHM in the workplace
•K
 arnali Water Security Activity
(Upcoming)
(International)
nongovernmental
organizations

•W
 aterAid, Save the Children,
Plan, SNV Nepal Oxfam, etc.,
active in small-scale integrated
WASH linked with education,
health, and nutrition

WUSCs focused, evidence-based
advocacy

(continued)

Appendix B: Development Partner Engagement    47

TABLE B.1 (continued)
Subsector
Irrigation

Hydropower

Development
partners

Service delivery

Policy and institutional
strengthening

World Bank

• Irrigation and Water Resources
Management Project
•R
 ani Jamara Kulariya Irrigation
Project

Policy reform

ADB

•C
 ommunity Managed Irrigated
Agriculture (Sector) Project
•W
 ater Resource Preparatory
Facility Project

Policy development

Saudi Fund

•D
 unduwa Irrigation Project

Policy links

Kuwait Fund

• Irrigation Systems Improvement
Project

Policy links

OPEC Fund for
International
Development

•S
 ikta Irrigation Project

Policy links

World Bank

•P
 rogrammatic Energy Sector
Development Policy Credit
•P
 ower Sector Reform and
Sustainable Hydropower
Development Project
•N
 epal India Electricity
Transmission and Trade Project
2011, plus additional financing
in 2013

Policy reform and institutional
strengthening

ADB

•S
 outh Asia Sub Regional
Economic Cooperation Power
System Expansion Project
•E
 nergy Access and Efficiency
Improvement Project, Electricity
Transmission Expansion and
Supply Improvement Project
•P
 ower Transmission and
Distribution Efficiency
Enhancement Project
•T
 anahu Hydropower Project,
Project Preparatory Facility for
Energy

Policy reform and institutional
strengthening

KfW

•R
 econstruction and upgrading of
electricity supply
•M
 iddle Marsyangdi Hydrolectric
Project
•C
 hilime Trishuli Transmission
Line Project

Policy links

Saudi and Kuwait
Fund

• Budhi Ganga Hydropower
Project

Policy links

Source: Based on the Development Cooperation Report (GoN 2018b).
Note: ADB = Asian Development Bank; JICA = Japan International Cooperation Agency; KfW = Development bank of the
German Federal Ministry for Economic Cooperation and Development; ODF = open defecation free; OPEC = Organization
of the Petroleum Exporting Countries; UN-Habitat = United Nations Human Settlements Programme; UNICEF = United
Nations Children’s Fund; USAID = US Agency for International Development; WASH = water supply, sanitation, and hygiene;
WHO = World Health Organization; WUSCs = water users and sanitation committees.

Appendix C: Electricity Sources
and Loss
FIGURE C.1 Generation, Import, and System Loss of Hydropower, Nepal, 2017–19
5000
4476

4500

4082

4000

Hydropower (GWh)

3658

3449

3500

3161

3000
2500

3431

3359

2798

3299
2582
2175

1500
1000

0

2813

2752

2000

500

4738

425
2008

356
2009

639

694

746

2010

2011

2012

1319

1370

2014

2015

1778

790

2013

2016

2017

2018

2019

Year
Imports
Domestic hydropower generation

T and D losses
Beginning of load-shedding decline

Source: NEA 2017, 2018, and 2019.
Note: T&D losses = technical and distribution losses.

49

Appendix D: Methods for Climate
and Disaster Risk Analysis
1. 
Ensemble median statistics derived from NASA Earth Exchange Global Daily Downscaled
Projections (NEX-GDDP; NASA 2015)
Average daily precipitation, 99th percentile precipitation, and average daily maximum temperature
for South Asian countries were derived from the NASA Earth Exchange Global Daily Downscaled
Projections (NEX-GDDP) dataset (Thrasher and Nemani 2015). NEX-GDDP includes global daily
temperature and precipitation data downscaled to a 0.25º resolution for 21 global circulation models
(GCMs) released under the Coupled Model Intercomparison Project Phase 5 (CMIP5).
Three indicators were derived from NEX-GDDP in this analysis:
1. Average daily precipitation: mean precipitation
2. 99th percentile precipitation: the 99th percentile of daily precipitation each year, or the amount
of precipitation that is exceeded 1 percent of days each year
3. Average daily maximum temperature: mean maximum temperature
Indicators were calculated on a per-pixel basis for each year, then averaged over 31-year windows for
baseline (1970–2000) and future (2035–65) periods to minimize the effect of interannual fluctuations.
Indicators were calculated independently for each model, and the median value across all 21 models

51

52   GLACIERS, RIVERS, AND SPRINGS: A WATER SECTOR DIAGNOSTIC OF NEPAL

TABLE D.1 CMIP5 Models Included in the NEX-GDDP Dataset
ACCESS1-0

GFDL-CM3

BCC-CSM1-1

GFDL-ESM2G

BNU-ESM

GFDL-ESM2M

CanESM2

INMCM4

CCSM4

IPSL-CM5A-LR

CESM1-BGC

IPSL-CM5A-MR

CNRM-CM5

MIROC-ESM

CSIRO-MK3-6-0

MIROC-ESM-CHEM

Source: Thrasher and Nemani 2015.

(ensemble median) was taken as a representative value. Country-level statistics were created by averaging the value for all pixels within that country.
2. 
High-resolution representative precipitation and discharge fields derived from Lutz et al.
(2016) and Wijngaard et al. (2017)
Within Nepal, four additional indicators were derived from high-resolution precipitation and discharge
data produced by Lutz et al. (2016) and Wijngaard et al. (2017). Lutz et al. selected four representative
CMIP5 GCMs for each of two RCP scenarios for the upper Indus, Ganges, and Brahmaputra River basins.
Models were selected based on historical performance and coverage of the range of possible future outcomes: warm-wet, warm-dry, cool-wet, and cool-dry (table D.2). The Lutz et al. dataset, which includes
temperature and precipitation data from each of these models, was downscaled to a high-resolution
10 km grid. Wijngaard et al. (2017) use these data to model future hydrological fluxes.
Cumulative daily precipitation, average onset of monsoon, and consecutive dry days for Nepal were
calculated from Lutz et al. (2016). Cumulative daily precipitation is the average daily precipitation
in Nepal on each calendar day of the year. Average date of monsoon onset was calculated as the first
day each year with at least 5 mm of precipitation followed by at least 10 days of at least 1 mm of precipitation. Consecutive dry days for areas within Nepal were calculated as the maximum number of
consecutive days each year with less than 1 mm of precipitation. All indicators were first calculated on
a per-pixel, per-year, per-model basis and then aggregated into 31-year averages for each model for baseline (1990–2010) and future (2015–45) periods. Ensemble medians were calculated as representative
values across the set of models for each RCP scenario.
Annual hydrographs for the Karnali, Gandaki, and Kosi rivers were derived from modeled daily discharge
for three simulated river gauges from Wijngaard et al. (2017). Hydrographs show average daily discharge
for each calendar day of the year, averaged over 31-year periods. For each river we also estimated the
probability of extreme discharge values by fitting Gumbel distributions to the annual maximum discharges for 31-year windows using the Python SciPy library. Gumbel distributions are widely used to
model the probabilities of extreme events (e.g., Morrison and Smith 2002).

Appendix D: Methods for Climate and Disaster Risk Analysis    53

TABLE D.2 Selected GCM Runs
RCP4.5

RCP8.5

Cold, wet

BNU‐ESM_r1i1p1

Cold, dry

inmcm4_r1i1p1

Warm, dry

CMCC‐CMS_r1i1p1

Warm, wet

CSIRO‐Mk3‐6‐0_r4i1p1

Cold, dry

inmcm4_r1i1p1

Warm, dry

CMCC‐CMS_r1i1p1

Cold, wet

bcc‐csm1‐1_r1i1p1

Warm, wet

CanESM2_r3i1p1

Source: Lutz et al. 2016.

References
ADB (Asian Development Bank). 2005. “Sector Assessment (Summary): Irrigation.” Nepal Community Irrigation
Project, ADB, Manila. https://www.adb.org/sites/default/files/linked-documents/38417-02-nep-ssa.pdf.
ADB. 2010. Nepal: Promoting Private Sector Participation in the Power Sector. Technical assistance consultant’s
report prepared by SOFRECO, France, in association with Total Management Services, Nepal, for the Ministry
of Energy and the Department of Electricity Development. Manila: ADB. https://www.adb.org/sites/default​
/­files/project-document/75402/41025-012-nep-tacr.pdf.
ADB. 2012. Shallow Tubewell Irrigation in Nepal: Impacts of the Community Groundwater Irrigation Sector Project.
Impact Evaluation Study. Manila: ADB. https://www.adb.org/sites/default/files/evaluation-document/35900​
/­files/ies-nep-final.pdf.
ADB. 2013. Proposed Loan and Grant and Administration of Loan and Grant. Nepal: Kathmandu Valley Wastewater
Management Project. Report and Recommendation of the President to the Board of Directors. Manila: ADB.
https://www.adb.org/sites/default/files/project-document/76314/43524-014-nep-rrp.pdf.
ADB. 2016. Asian Water Development Outlook 2016: Strengthening Water Security in Asia and the Pacific. Mandaluyong
City, Philippines: ADB. https://www.adb.org/sites/default/files/publication/189411/awdo-2016.pdf.
ADB, DFID (UK Department for International Development), and World Bank. 2011. Sectoral Perspectives on
Gender and Social Inclusion: Water Supply and Sanitation. Gender and Social Exclusion Assessment Sectoral
Series: Monograph 7. Nepal: ADB, DFID, and World Bank.
Agarwal, A., N. K. Agrawal, and R. K. Nema. 2014. “Life Line: The Springs of Uttarakhand, India.” International
Journal of Innovative Research in Science, Engineering and Technology 3 (4): 11553–60.
Aryal, K. K., H. D. Joshi, M. Dhimal, S. P. Singh, P. Dhakal, B. Dhimal, and C. L. Bhusal. 2012. “Environmental
Burden of Diarrhoeal Diseases due to Unsafe Water Supply and Poor Sanitation Coverage in Nepal.”
Journal of Nepal Health Research Council 10 (21): 125–29.
Bagale, D. R., and K. D. Adhikari. 2020. “Mahakali Treaty: Delay in Implementation and Resulting Impacts from
Nepal’s Perspective.” Water Policy 22 (4): 658–69.
Baraniak, S. 2015. Urbanisation and Urban Growth in Nepal. GSDRC Helpdesk research report 1294. Birmingham,
UK: Governance and Social Development Resource Centre (GSDRC), University of Birmingham.
Bhandari, D., M. Uprety, G. Ghimire, B. Kumal, L. Pokharel, and P. Khadka. 2018. Nepal Flood 2017: Wake Up
Call for Effective Preparedness and Response. Rugby, UK: Practical Action.
Bharati, L., P. Gurung, P. Jayakody, V. Smakhtin, and U. Bhattarai. 2014. “The Projected Impact of Climate Change
on Water Availability and Development in the Koshi Basin, Nepal.” Mountain Research and Development 34 (2):
118–30.
Bolch, T., J. M. Shea, S. Liu, F. M. Azam, Y. Gao, S. Gruber, W. W. Immerzeel, A. Kulkarni, H. Li, A. A. Tahir, G.
Zhang, and Y. Zhang. 2019. “Status and Change of the Cryosphere in the Extended Hindu Kush Himalaya
Region.” In The Hindu Kush Himalaya Assessment, edited by P. Wester, A. Mishra, A. Mukherji, and A. Shrestha,
209–55. Switzerland: Springer, Cham.
Brown, C., and U. Lall. 2006. “Water and Economic Development: The Role of Variability and a Framework for
Resilience.” Natural Resources Forum 30 (4): 306–17.
Brown, S., M. Budimir, E. Lovell, E. Wilkinson, and C. Meechaiya. 2019. “The Governance of Nepal’s Flood
Early Warning System: Opportunities under Federalism.” Building Resilience and Adaptation to Climate
Extremes and Disasters (BRACED) Working Paper, Overseas Development Institute (ODI), London. www.odi​
.org​/­publications/11418-governance-nepal-s-flood-early-warning-system-opportunities-under-federalism.
CBS (Central Bureau of Statistics). 2008. Nepal Labour Force Survey 2007/08: Statistical Report. Kathmandu, Nepal:
CBS, National Planning Commission Secretariat, Government of Nepal.

55

56    GLACIERS, RIVERS, AND SPRINGS: A WATER SECTOR DIAGNOSTIC OF NEPAL

CBS. 2011. Nepal Living Standards Survey 2010/11: Statistical Report: Volume 1. Kathmandu, Nepal: CBS, Government
of Nepal.
CBS. 2015. Nepal Multiple Indicator Cluster Survey (MICS) 2014: Final Report: Monitoring the Situation of Children
and Women. Kathmandu, Nepal: CBS and UNICEF Nepal.
CBS. 2019. Report on the Nepal Labour Force Survey 2017/18. Kathmandu, Nepal: CBS, National Planning
Commission, Government of Nepal.
CBS. 2020. Nepal Multiple Indicator Cluster Survey (MICS) 2019: Final Report: Monitoring the Situation of Children
and Women. Kathmandu, Nepal: CBS and UNICEF Nepal.
Clement, F., D. Suhardiman, and L. Bharati. 2017. “IWRM Discourses, Institutional Holy Grail and Water Justice in
Nepal.” Water Alternatives 10 (3): 870–87.
Coffey, D., M. Geruso, and D. Spears. 2017. “Sanitation, Disease Externalities and Anaemia: Evidence from
Nepal.” The Economic Journal 128 (611): 1395–432.
Cosic, D., S. Dahal, and M. Kitzmuller. 2017. Climbing Higher: Toward a Middle-Income Nepal. Country economic
memorandum. Washington, DC: World Bank.
Damania, R., S. Desbureaux, M. Hyland, A. Islam, S. Moore, A.-S. Rodella, J. Russ, and E. Zaveri. 2017. Uncharted
Waters: The New Economics of Water Scarcity and Variability. Washington, DC: World Bank.
Desbureaux, S., and A-S. Rodella. 2019. “Drought in the City: The Economic Impact of Water Scarcity in Latin
American Metropolitan Areas.” World Development 114 (February): 13–27.
Dhaubanjar, S., C. Davidsen, and P. Bauer-Gottwein. 2017. “Multi-Objective Optimization for Analysis of Changing
Trade-Offs in the Nepalese Water-Energy-Food Nexus with Hydropower Development.” Water 9 (3): 162.
Dixit, A., M. Upadhya, K. Dixit, A. Pokhrel, and D. R. Rai. 2009. Living with Water Stress in the Hills of the Koshi
Basin, Nepal. Kathmandu, Nepal: International Centre for Integrated Mountain Development.
Dixit, A., and A. Shukla. 2017. Benefits and Burden: A Case Study of Gandak River Agreement. Kathmandu, Nepal:
ISET-Nepal and ActionAid Nepal.
Engel, E., R. D. Fischer, and A. Galetovic. 2020. “When and How to Use Public-Private Partnerships in
Infrastructure: Lessons from the International Experience.” Working paper 26766, National Bureau of
Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.
Eriksson, M., J. Xu, A. B. Shrestha, R. A. Vaidya, S. Nepal, and K. Sandström. 2009. The Changing Himalayas: Impact
of Climate Change on Water Resources and Livelihoods in the Greater Himalaya. Kathmandu, Nepal: International
Centre for Integrated Mountain Development.
Ezemenari, K. M., and N. K. Joshi. 2019. “Nepal Development Update: Investing in People to Close the Human
Capital Gap.” Working paper 137439, World Bank Group, Washington, DC. http://documents.worldbank.org​
/­curated/en/231411559761365601/pdf/Nepal-Development-Update-Investing-in-People-to-Close-the-Human​
-Capital-Gap.pdf.
Gleick, P. H. 1996. “Basic Water Requirements for Human Activities: Meeting Basic Needs.” Water International
21 (2): 83–92.
Gokarn, S., and A. Sajjanhar. 2014. “Turning Water Challenges into Opportunities.” In Reinvigorating SAARC:
India’s Opportunities and Challenges, edited by V. Mehta and W. Sidhu. New Delhi: Brookings India. https://
www.brookings.edu/research/turning-water-challenges-into-opportunities.
GoN (Government of Nepal). 2014a. National Water Supply and Sanitation Policy 2014—Final Draft. Kathmandu,
Nepal: Ministry of Urban Development. Accessed January 20, 2020. http://www.ess.gov.np/uploads/ck/a__1478​
598768_WSS%20Policy%20Dec14%20E.pdf.
GoN. 2014b. Nationwide Coverage and Functionality Status of Water Supply and Sanitation in Nepal. National
Management Information Project. Kathmandu, Nepal: Ministry of Urban Development, Department of
Water Supply and Sewerage. https://dwssm.gov.np/wp-content/uploads/2019/05/Report-2014.pdf.
GoN. 2014c. “Hydromap: Nationwide Distribution of Hydropower Projects.” National Planning
Commission (NPC), Kathmandu, Nepal. Accessed November 10, 2015. https://www.npc.gov.np​
/­nationwide_distribution_of_hydro_projects/.

References    57

GoN. 2016a. Water Service Providers: Capacity Assessment and Benchmarking 2014–15. Kathmandu, Nepal: Ministry
of Water Supply and Sanitation, Sector Efficiency Improvement Unit.
GoN. 2016b. Nepal Water Supply, Sanitation and Hygiene Sector Development Plan (2016–2030). Draft pending Ministry Approval. Kathmandu, Nepal: Ministry of Water Supply and Sanitation, Sector Efficiency
Improvement Unit.
GoN. 2016c. Action Plan on National Energy Crisis Prevention and Electricity Development Decade. Kathmandu,
Nepal: Ministry of Energy.
GoN. 2018a. Draft National Water Resources Policy 2017/2018. Kathmandu, Nepal: Ministry of Energy, Water
Resources and Irrigation.
GoN. 2018b. Development Cooperation Report. Kathmandu, Nepal: Ministry of Finance.
GoN. 2019. Drinking Water and Hygiene Update Report 2075. Kathmandu, Nepal: Ministry of Water Supply,
Department of Water Supply and Sewerage Management (DWSSM).
GoN and ADB. 2019. Irrigation Master Plan Preparation through Integrated River Basin Planning. Kathmandu, Nepal:
Water Resources Project Preparatory Facility Department of Water Resources and Irrigation, Ministry of
Energy, Water Resources and Irrigation.
GoN, IDS-Nepal (Integrated Development Society Nepal), PAC (Practical Action Consulting), and GCAP (Global
Climate Adaptation Partnership). 2014. Economic Impact Assessment of Climate Change in Key Sectors in Nepal.
Kathmandu, Nepal: Government of Nepal, Ministry of Science, Technology and Environment (MoSTE).
Goodrich, C. G., P. B. Udas, M. B. Gurung, N. T. Shrestha, and S. Shrestha. 2017. “Gender and Social Inclusion
in Local Water Planning: Lessons from Water Use Master Plan Practices in Nepal.” ICIMOD Working Paper
2017/16, International Centre for Integrated Mountain Development, Kathmandu.
Greacen, C., and A. Palettu. 2007. “Electricity Sector Planning and Hydropower in the Mekong Region.” In
Democratizing Water Governance in the Mekong Region, edited by L. Lebel, J. Dore, R. Daniel, and Y. Koma,
93–125. Chiang Mai, Thailand: Mekong Press.
Gurung, A., S. Adhikari, R. Chauhan, S. Thakuri, S. Nakarmi, S. Ghale, B. Dongol, and D. Rijal. 2019. “Water Crises
in a Water-Rich Country: Case Studies from Rural Watersheds of Nepal’s Mid-Hills.” Water Policy 21 (4): 826–47.
Gyawali, D. and A. Dixit. 1999. “Mahakali Impasse and Indo-Nepal Water Conflict.” Economic and Political Weekly
34 (9): 553–64.
Gyawali, D., 2015. Nexus Governance: Harnessing Contending Forces at Work. London: International Water
Association.
Haslett, S., G. Jones, M. Isidro, and A. Sefton. 2014. Small Area Estimation of Food Insecurity and Undernutrition in
Nepal. Kathmandu, Nepal: Central Bureau of Statistics, National Planning Commissions Secretariat, World
Food Programme, UNICEF, and World Bank.
Hirji, R., A. Nicol, and R. Davis. 2017. South Asia Climate Change Risks in Water Management. Washington, DC:
World Bank and Colombo, Sri Lanka: International Water Management Institute.
ICIMOD (International Centre for Integrated Mountain Development). 2009. Water Storage: A Strategy for Climate
Change Adaptation in the Himalayas. Sustainable Mountain Development: Winter No. 56. Kathmandu, Nepal:
ICIMOD.
IFC (International Finance Corporation). 2015. Hydroelectric Power: A Guide for Developers and Investors.
Washington, DC: World Bank Group.
Immerzeel, W. W., A. F. Lutz, and M. Andrade. 2020. “Importance and Vulnerability of the World’s Water
Towers.” Nature 577: 364–69. doi:10.1038/s41586-019-1822-y.
Intralawan, A., A. Smajgl, W. McConnell, D. B. Ahlquist, J. Ward, and D. B. Kramer. 2019. “Reviewing Benefits and
Costs of Hydropower Development Evidence from the Lower Mekong River Basin.” Wiley Interdisciplinary
Reviews: Water 6 (4): e1347.
Jha, M. 2016. “22 Governments in 26 Years: The Economic Cost to Nepal of Decades of Political Disarray.” Nepali
Times #819, July 29–August 4. Accessed July 29, 2019.

58    GLACIERS, RIVERS, AND SPRINGS: A WATER SECTOR DIAGNOSTIC OF NEPAL

http://archive.nepalitimes.com/regular-columns/Economic-Class/22-%20governments-in-26-years,757.
JICA (Japan International Cooperation Agency). 2014. Nationwide Master Plan Study on Storage-Type Hydroelectric
Power Development in Nepal. Submitted to the Nepal Electricity Authority. https://openjicareport.jica.go.jp​
/­pdf/12147310.pdf.
Jusi, S. 2009. “Openings Towards Integrated Water Resources Management in Lao PDR.” International Journal of
River Basin Management 7 (1): 23–29.
Jusi, S. 2010. “Hydropower and Sustainable Development: A Case Study of Lao PDR.” WIT Transactions on Ecology
and the Environment 131: 199–210.
Kaczan, D., S. Chen, and T. Arin. 2019. The Cost of Environmental Degradation in Nepal. Background report for the
Nepal Environment Sector Diagnostic: Priorities for Accelerating Sustainable Growth. Washington, DC: World Bank
Group.
Karki, R., S. Hasson, U. Schickhoff, T. Scholten, and J. Böhner. 2017. “Rising Precipitation Extremes across Nepal.”
Climate 5 (1): 4.
Lahmeyer International. 2018. “Lahmeyer Prepares Master Plan for Water Resources and Hydropower
Development in Nepal.” https://www.firmenpresse.de/pressrelease579088/lahmeyer-prepares​
-master-plan-for-water-resources-and-hydropower-development-in-nepal.html.
Lutz, A., H. W. Maat, H. Biemans, A. Shrestha, P. Wester, and W. W. Immerzeel. 2016. “Selecting Representative
Climate Models for Climate Change Impact Studies: An Advanced Envelope-Based Selection Approach.”
International Journal of Climatology 36 (12): 3988–4005. doi:10.1002/joc.4608.
Matthews, N. 2012. “Water Grabbing in the Mekong Basin—An Analysis of the Winners and Losers of Thailand’s
Hydropower Development in Lao PDR.” Water Alternatives 5 (2): 392–411.
McAdoo, B. G., M. Quak, K. R. Gnyawali, B. R. Adhikari, S. Devkota, P. L. Rajbhandari, and K. Sudmeier-Rieux.
2018. “Roads and Landslides in Nepal: How Development Affects Environmental Risk.” Natural Hazards and
Earth System Sciences 18 (12): 3203–10.
MoFE (Ministry of Forests and Environment). 2018. National Ramsar Strategy and Action Plan, Nepal (2018–2024).
Kathmandu, Nepal: MoFE.
MoFE. 2019. “National Climate Change Policy, 2076.” Kathmandu Nepal: MoFE, Government of Nepal https://
mofe.gov.np/downloadfile/climatechange_policy​_english_1580984322.pdf.
MoH (Ministry of Health) Nepal, New ERA, and ICF. 2017. Nepal: Demographic and Health Survey 2016.
Kathmandu, Nepal: MoH.
MoHA (Ministry of Home Affairs). 2018. National Policy for Disaster Risk Reduction. Kathmandu, Nepal: MoHA,
Government of Nepal. http://drrportal.gov.np/uploads/document/1444.pdf.
MoLESS (Ministry of Labour, Employment and Social Security). 2020. Nepal Labour Migration Report 2020.
Kathmandu, Nepal: MoLESS. Accessed January 2, 2021. https://moless.gov.np/wp-content/uploads/2020/03/
Migration-Report-2020-English.pdf.
Morrison, J. E., and J. A. Smith. 2002. “Stochastic Modeling of Flood Peaks Using the Generalized Extreme Value
Distribution.” Water Resources Research 38 (12): 41-1–41-12. https://doi.org/10.1029/2001WR000502.
Muzzini, E., and G. Aparicio. 2013. “Urban Growth and Spatial Transition in Nepal: An Initial Assessment.”
Directions in Development: Countries and Regions. Washington, DC: World Bank.
Negi, G. C. S., and V. Joshi. 2002. “Drinking Water Issues and Development of Spring Sanctuaries in a Mountain
Watershed in the Indian Himalaya.” Mountain Research and Development 22 (1): 29–31.
NEA (Nepal Electricity Authority). 2017. Annual Report of Nepal Electricity Authority 2016/2017. Kathmandu, Nepal:
NEA. Released on August 23, 2017.
NEA. 2018. Annual Report of Nepal Electricity Authority 2017/2018. Kathmandu, Nepal: NEA. Released on August 20,
2018.
NEA. 2019. Annual Report of Nepal Electricity Authority 2018/2019. Kathmandu, Nepal: NEA. Released on October 21,
2019.

References    59

Nepal, S., N. Neupane, D. Belbase, V. P. Pandey, and A. Mukherji. 2021. “Achieving Water Security in Nepal through
Unravelling the Water-Energy-Agriculture Nexus.” International Journal of Water Resources Development 37 (1):
67–93.
Ogino, K., S. K. Dash, and M. Nakayama. 2019. “Change to Hydropower Development in Bhutan and
Nepal.” Energy for Sustainable Development 50: 1–17.
Opryszko, M. C., H. Huang, K. Soderlund, and K. J. Schwab. 2009. “Data Gaps in Evidence-Based Research on
Small Water Enterprises in Developing Countries.” Journal of Water and Health 7 (4): 609–22. doi:10.2166​
/­wh.2009.213.
Pandey, R., and D. K. Bardsley. 2019. “An Application of the Household Food Insecurity Access Scale to Assess
Food Security in Rural Communities of Nepal.” Asia & the Pacific Policy Studies 6 (2): 130–50.
Pesaresi, M., D. Ehrlich, S. Ferri, A. J. Florczyk, S. C. Freire, S. Halkia, A. M. Julea, T. Kemper, P. Soille, and V. Syrris.
2016. Operating Procedure for the Production of the Global Human Settlement Layer from Landsat Data of the
Epochs 1975, 1990, 2000, and 2014. EUR 27741 EN. Luxembourg: Publications Office of the European Union.
doi: 10.2788/253582.
Pasakhala, B., H. Harada, S. Fujii, S. Tanaka, B. R. Shivakoti, and S. Shrestha. 2013. “Household Coping Measures
with Water Scarcity: A Case Study in Kathmandu, Nepal.” Journal of Japan Society of Civil Engineers, Series G
(Environmental Research) 69 (7): 73–81.
Pattanayak, S. K., J-C. Yang, D. Whittington, and K. C. B. Kumar. 2005. “Coping with Unreliable Public Water
Supplies: Averting Expenditures by Households in Kathmandu, Nepal.” Water Resources Research 41 (2):
W02012. doi:10.1029/2003WR002443.
Plummer, B. J., and P. Guthrie. 2016. “A Typology of the Effects of Pre-Construction Delay for Large Hydropower
Projects.” International Journal on Hydropower and Dams 2016 (2): 105–13.
Poudel, D. D., and T. W. Duex. 2017. “Vanishing Springs in Nepalese Mountains: Assessment of Water Sources,
Farmers’ Perceptions, and Climate Change Adaptation.” Mountain Research and Development 37 (1): 35–46.
Pradhan, P., and M. Belbase. 2018. “Institutional Reforms in Irrigation Sector for Sustainable Agriculture Water
Management including Water Users Associations in Nepal.” Hydro Nepal: Journal of Water, Energy and
Environment 23: 58–70.
Raina, A., J. Zhao, X. Wu, L. Kunwar, and D. Whittington. 2019. “The Structure of Water Vending Markets in
Kathmandu, Nepal.” Water Policy 21 (S1): 50–75.
Rogers, P. 1993. “The Value of Cooperation in Resolving International River Basin Disputes.” Natural Resources
Forum 17 (2): 117–31.
Rodriguez, L. 2019. “Experts Question Open Defecation-Free Status in India and Nepal.” Global Citizen,
October 10. https://www.globalcitizen.org/en/content/nepal-india-declare-odf-status/.
Rounce, D. R., C. S. Watson, and D. C. McKinney. 2017. “Identification of Hazard and Risk for Glacial Lakes in the
Nepal Himalaya Using Satellite Imagery from 2000–2015.” Remote Sensing 9 (7): 654.
Sharma, B., S. Nepal, D. Gyawali, G. S. Pokharel, S. Wahid, A. Mukherji, S. Acharya, and A. B. Shrestha. 2016.
“Springs, Storage Towers, and Water Conservation in the Midhills of Nepal.” ICIMOD Working Paper 2016/3,
International Centre for Integrated Mountain Development, Kathmandu, Nepal.
Sharma, M., and S. Dahal. 2010. “Assessment of Impacts of Climate Change and Local Adaptation Measures in
Agriculture Sector and Livelihoods of Indigenous Community in High Hills of Sankhuwasabha District.” In
Understanding Climate Change: Some Case Studies, NAST special edition, 16–21. Nepal: Nepal Adaptation of
Action (NAPA).
Shrestha, G., and F. Clement. 2019. “Unravelling Gendered Practices in the Public Water Sector in Nepal.” Water
Policy 21 (5): 1017–33.
Shrestha, A., D. Joshi, and D. Roth. 2020. “The Hydro-Social Dynamics of Exclusion and Water Insecurity of Dalits
in Peri-Urban Kathmandu Valley, Nepal: Fluid Yet Unchanging.” Contemporary South Asia 28 (3): 320–35. DOI:
10.1080/09584935.2020.1770200.

60    GLACIERS, RIVERS, AND SPRINGS: A WATER SECTOR DIAGNOSTIC OF NEPAL

Shrestha, A. B., and R. Aryal. 2011. “Climate Change in Nepal and Its Impact on Himalayan Glaciers.” Regional
Environmental Change 11 (1): 65–77.
Shrestha, A., and S. Silwal. 2017. “Water Commons and Transboundary Rivers.” ISET-Nepal and ActionAid Nepal,
Kathmandu, Nepal.
Shrestha, K., B. Thapa, Y. Aihara, S. Shrestha, A. Bhattarai, N. Bista, F. Kazama, and J. Shindo. 2018. “Hidden Cost
of Drinking Water Treatment and Its Relation with Socioeconomic Status in Nepalese Urban Context.” Water
10 (5): 607.
Shrestha, S., Y. Aihara, A. P. Bhattarai, N. Bista, S. Rajbhandari, N. Kondo, F. Kazama, and J. Shindo. 2017.
“Dynamics of Domestic Water Consumption in the Urban Area of the Kathmandu Valley: Situation Analysis
Pre and Post 2015 Gorkha Earthquake.” Water 9 (3): 222.
Suhardiman, D., F. Clement, and L. Bharati. 2015. “Integrated Water Resources Management in Nepal: Key
Stakeholders’ Perceptions and Lessons Learned.” International Journal of Water Resources Development 31 (2):
284–300.
Tambe, S., G. Kharel, M. L. Arrawatia, H. Kulkarni, K. Mahamuni, and A. K. Ganeriwala. 2012. “Reviving Dying
Springs: Climate Change Adaptation Experiments from the Sikkim Himalaya.” Mountain Research and
Development 32 (1): 62–72.
Thakur, J. K., R. K. Thakur, A. L. Ramanathan, M. Kumar, and S. K. Singh. 2011. “Arsenic Contamination of
Groundwater in Nepal—An Overview.” Water 3 (1): 1–20.
Thapa, B., H. Ishidaira, V. Pandey, T. Bhandari, and N. Shakya. 2018. “Evaluation of Water Security in Kathmandu
Valley before and after Water Transfer from Another Basin.” Water 10 (2): 224.
The government of Nepal announced its plan in 2016: National Energy Crisis Reduction and Electricity
Development Decade 2016–2026 (GoN 2016c).
The 15th Periodic Plan (2020) of the GoN prepared by National Planning Commission reports a lower figure: 89
percent of Nepalis have basic drinking water provision; 21 percent have moderate provisions; and 99 percent
have basic sanitation.
Thrasher. B., and R. Nemani. 2015. “NASA Earth Exchange Global Daily Downscaled Projections (NEX-GDDP).”
https://nex.nasa.gov/nex/projects/1356/.
Timilsina, G., P. Sapkota, and J. Steinbuks. 2018. “How Much Has Nepal Lost in the Last Decade Due to Load
Shedding?: An Economic Assessment Using a CGE Model.” Policy Research Working Paper 8468, World Bank,
Washington, DC.
Tiwari, S., H. G. Jacoby, and E. Skoufias. 2013. “Monsoon Babies: Rainfall Shocks and Child Nutrition in Nepal.”
Policy Research Working Paper 6395, World Bank, Washington, DC.
Udmale, P., H. Ishidaira, B. Thapa, and N. Shakya. 2016. “The Status of Domestic Water Demand: Supply Deficit in
the Kathmandu Valley, Nepal.” Water 8 (5): 196.
Upreti, T. 2006. “Prospects and Problems of Nepalese Water Resources.” In International Watercourses Law and Its
Application in South Asia, 181–256. Kathmandu, Nepal: Pairavi Prakashan.
Vaidya, R. A. 2015. “Governance and Management of Local Water Storage in the Hindu Kush Himalayas.”
International Journal of Water Resources Development 31 (2): 253–68.
WECS (Water and Energy Commission Secretariat). 2011. Water Resources of Nepal in the Context of Climate Change.
Kathmandu, Nepal: WECS.
Water Resources Management Programme. 2012. Guidelines for Water Use Master Plan Preparation. Dhobighat,
Lalitpur, Nepal: HELVETAS Swiss Intercooperation Nepal.
WHO/UNICEF. 2020. Joint Water Supply and Sanitation Monitoring Programme (JMP) Wash Dash 2020. Geneva:
World Health Organization.
Wijngaard, R. R., A. F. Lutz, S. Nepal, S. Khanal, S. Pradhananga, A. B. Shrestha, and W. W. Immerzeel. 2017.
“Future Changes in Hydro-Climatic Extremes in the Upper Indus, Ganges, and Brahmaputra River
Basins.” PloS One 12 (12): e0190224. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0190224.

References    61

World Bank. 2012. The Pilot Program for Climate Resilience (PPCR) of the Strategic Climate Fund (SCF) to Nepal for
Building Resilience to Climate-Related Hazards. Washington, DC: World Bank.
World Bank. 2016. Sources of Growth in Agriculture. Washington, DC: World Bank.
World Bank. 2019a. “New Government Report Takes Stock of Federalism in Nepal.” Press release,
December 17, World Bank, Washington, DC, https://www.worldbank.org/en/news/press-release/2019/12/17​/­new
-government-report-takes-stock-of-federalism-in-nepal.
World Bank. 2019b. Public Expenditure Reviews of the Water Sector in Select Countries in Asia: Final Report Nepal.
Internal Report. Washington, DC: World Bank.
World Bank. 2019c. South Asia Water Initiative (SAWI): Annual Report July 2018–June 2019. Washington, DC: World
Bank.
World Bank. 2019d. Water Balance Study for Bangladesh Water Platform. Hydrological Modeling by International
Institute for Applied Systems Analysis (IIASA), Internal Report. Washington, DC: World Bank.
World Bank. 2019e. Nepal Environment Sector Diagnostic: Path to Sustainable Growth under Federalism (A Country
Environmental Analysis). Washington, DC: World Bank.
World Bank. 2019f. Climate Impacts Analysis for Nepal Water Platform. Climate Risk Modeling by Francis Gassert,
Internal Report. Washington, DC: World Bank.
World Bank. 2020. Notes from Mission to Surkhet. Internal Report. Washington, DC: World Bank.

SKU W20042

